The Project Gutenberg eBook of Twice round the clock, by George
Augustus Sala

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Twice round the clock
       Or the hours of the day and night in London

Author: George Augustus Sala

Illustrator: William M'Connel

Release Date: November 21, 2022 [eBook #69402]

Language: English

Produced by: Mark C. Orton and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWICE ROUND THE CLOCK ***






[Illustration: GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA, THE AUTHOR OF “TWICE ROUND THE
CLOCK.”]




                          TWICE ROUND THE CLOCK;
                                  OR THE
                        HOURS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT
                                IN LONDON.

                                    BY
                          GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA,
    AUTHOR OF “A JOURNEY DUE NORTH,” “GASLIGHT AND DAYLIGHT,” ETC. ETC.

                             ILLUSTRATED WITH
        A PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR, AND NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS ON WOOD,
                    FROM DRAWINGS BY WILLIAM M’CONNEL.

                                 LONDON:
                    RICHARD MARSH, 122, FLEET STREET.
                                  1862.




PREFACE.

TO AUGUSTUS MAYHEW.


Had I not fifty other valid reasons—did I not feel myself impelled to
such a course by the long years of affectionate intercourse which have
cast sunshine on that highway of life, of which the shadier side of
the road has been apportioned to me, I should still, my dear Augustus,
dedicate this book to you. I could show, I hope, my affection and esteem
in other ways; but to address to you the Epistle Dedicatory of “Twice
Round the Clock” is only your due, in justice and in courtesy. Civility
is not so common a quality among the Eminent British Authors of the day,
and mutual admiration is not so plentifully displayed by our Fieldings
and Smolletts of 1859, that we middling and middle-class ink-spillers
can afford to throw away a chance of saying a kind or civil thing to one
another in the right way and in the right place. Do you, therefore, say
something neat and complimentary about me in the preface to your next
book; and I only trust that the task will confer as sincere a pleasure on
you as it confers on me at this moment.

But I might still, I must admit, admire you very much, without that
admiration giving you a Right to the Dedication of a Book relating
exclusively to London Life and London Manners in the nineteenth century.
Herein, however, rests, I think, your claim: That you are the author
of a capital book called “Paved with Gold,” replete with the finest
and shrewdest observation drawn from the scenes we have both delighted
to survey, to study, and to describe, and of which book, although the
basis was romantic fiction, the numerous episodes were picturesque but
eminently faithful photographs of fact. I should have liked, myself, to
tell the story of a prize fight, of a ratting match, or of a boy’s low
lodging-house, in my own way, and in these pages; but I shrank from the
attempt after your graphic narratives in “Paved with Gold.” And, again,
have you not been for years the fellow-labourer of your brother Henry,
in those deeply-tinted but unalterably-veracious studies of London Life,
of which we have the results in “Labour and the Poor” and in the “Great
World of London?” Of how many prisons, workhouses, factories, work-rooms,
have you not told the tale? of how many dramas of misery and poverty have
you not been the chronicler? Let us bow to the great ones of letters,
and, reading their books with a hearty, honest admiration, confess that
the capacity to produce such master-pieces is not given to us; but let
us, on our own parts, put in a modest claim to the recognition and
approval of the public. Please remember the reporters. Please not to
forget the bone-grubbers. Fling a pennyworth of praise to the excavators
and night-watchmen who have at least industriously laboured to collect
materials wherefrom better painters may execute glowing tableaux of
London Life. At least, we have toiled to bring together our tale of
bricks, that by the hand of genius they may be erected some day into a
Pyramid. At least, we have endeavoured to our utmost to describe the
London of our day as we have seen it, and as we know it; and, in the
words of the judicious Master Hooker—of whose works, my Augustus, I am
afraid you are not a very sedulous student—we have worked early and
late on London, and have done our best to paint the infinitely-varied
characteristics of its streets and its population, “Tho’ for no other
cause, yet for this, that Posteritie may know we have not looselie, thro’
silence, permitted thinges to pass away as in a dreame; there shall be
for men’s information extant thus much concerning the present state
of”—London.

So you see, my dear friend, that I have dedicated my work to you; and
that, _bon grè, mal grè_, you have been saddled with the dignity of its
Patron. I might have addressed you in heroic verse, and with your name
in capitals; and, in the manner of Mr. Alexander Pope, bidden you:—

    “Awake, my MAYHEW: leave all meaner things
    To low ambition and the pride of kings.”

I believe your present ambition extends only to few-acre farming and
the rearing of poultry, and I might well exhort you to return to your
literary pursuits, and to leave the Dorkings and Cochin Chinas alone.
But I refrain. Am I to insult my Patron with advice? Do I expect any
reward for my dedication? Will your Lordship send me a handful of
broad-pieces for my flattery’s sake by the hands of your gentleman’s
gentleman? Will you put me down for the next vacancy as a Commissioner
of Hackney Coaches, or the next reversion for a snug sinecure connected
with the Virginia Plantations or the Leeward Islands? Will your Lordship
invite me to dinner at your country-seat, and place me between Lady
Betty and the domestic chaplain? May I write rhyming epitaphs for her
ladyship’s pug-dog, untimely deceased from excess of cream and chicken?
Or will you speak to Mr. Secretary in my behalf, lest that last paper
of mine against Ministers in “Mist’s Weekly Journal” should draw down
on me the _ex-officio_ wrath of Mr. Attorney-General, and cause my ears
to be nailed to the pillory? Can I ever hope to crack a bottle in your
Lordship’s society at Button’s, or to see your Lordship’s coach-and-six
before my lodgings in Little Britain? Let us be thankful, rather, that
the species of literary patronage at which I have hinted exists no
longer, and that an Author has no need to toady his Patron in order to
make him his friend. For what more in cordiality and kind-fellowship
I could say, you will, I am sure, give me credit. When friendship is
paraded too much in public, its entire sincerity may be open to doubt. I
am afraid that Orestes, so affectionate on the stage, has often declined
in the green-room to lend Pylades sixpence; and I am given to understand,
that Damon has often come down from the platform, where he has been
saying such flourishing fine things about Pythias, and in private life
has spoken somewhat harshly of that worthy.

You will observe that, with the economy which we should all strive to
inculcate in an age of Financial Reform, I have made these remarks to
serve two ends. You are to take them, if you please, as a Dedication.
The public will be good enough to accept them as a Preface. But as the
dedicatory has hitherto disproportionately exceeded the prefatory matter,
a few words on my part are due to that great body-corporate of Patrons
whom some delight to call the “many-headed monster;” some the “million;”
some the fickle, ungrateful, and exigent—and some the generous,
forbearing, and discerning British Public.

The papers I have now collected into a volume under the title of “Twice
Round the Clock, or the Hours of the Day and Night in London,” were
originally published in the pages of the “Welcome Guest,” a weekly
periodical whose first and surprising success must be mainly ascribed to
the taste and spirit of its original proprietor, Mr. Henry Vizetelly.
I confess that I thought as little of “Twice Round the Clock” in the
earlier hours of its publication as the critics of the _Saturday
Review_—who, because I contributed for six years to another periodical
whose conductor they hold in hatred, have been pleased to pursue me with
an _acharnement_ quite exciting to experience—may think of it, now. I
looked upon the articles as mere ephemeral essays, of a description of
which I had thrown off hundreds during a desultory, albeit industrious,
literary career. But I found ere long that I had committed myself to
a task whose items were to form an Entirety in the end; that I had
begun the first act of a Drama which imperatively demanded working out
to its catastrophe. I grew more interested in the thing; I took more
pains; I felt myself spurred to accuracy by the conscientious zeal of
the admirable artist, Mr. William M’Connell, whose graphic and truthful
designs embellished my often halting text. I found, to my great surprise,
that the scenes and characters I had endeavoured to embody were awakening
feelings of curiosity and interest among the many thousand readers of
the journal to which I contributed. The work, such as it is, was in the
outset not very deliberately planned. I can only regret now, when it is
terminated, that the details I have sometimes only glanced at were not
more elaborately and completely carried out.

It would be a sorry piece of vanity on my part to imagine that the
conception of the History of a Day and Night in London is original.
I will tell you how I came to think of the scheme of “Twice Round the
Clock.” Four years ago, in Paris, my then Master in literature, Mr.
Charles Dickens, lent me a little thin octavo volume, which, I believe,
had been presented to him by another Master of the craft, Mr. Thackeray,
entitled—but I will transcribe the title-page in full.

                                LOW LIFE;
        OR, ONE HALF THE WORLD KNOWS NOT HOW THE OTHER HALF LIVE.

       Being a Critical Account of what is Transacted by People of
       almost all Religions, Nations, Circumstances, and Sizes of
                          Understanding, in the

                            TWENTY-FOUR HOURS,
                                 BETWEEN
                    SATURDAY NIGHT AND MONDAY MORNING.
                        In a true Description of a
                                 SUNDAY,
          As it is usually spent within the Bills of Mortality,
                calculated for the twenty-first of June.

       WITH AN ADDRESS TO THE INGENIOUS AND INGENUOUS MR. HOGARTH.

                 Let Fancy guess the rest.—_Buckingham._

The date of publication is not given; but internal evidence proves the
Opuscule to have been written during the latter part of the reign of
George the Second; and in the copy I now possess, and which I bought at
a “rarity” price, at a sale where it was ignorantly labelled among the
“_facetiæ_”—it is the saddest book, perhaps, that ever was written—in
my copy, which is bound up among some rascally pamphlets, there is
written on the fly-leaf the date 1759. Just one hundred years ago, you
see. The work is anonymous; but in a manuscript table of contents to
the collection of miscellanies of which it forms part, I find written
“By Tom Legge.” The epigraph says that it “is printed for the author,
and is to be sold by T. Legg, at the Parrot, Green Arbour Court, in
the Little Old Bailey.” Was the authorship mere guess-work on the part
of the owner of the book, or was “Tom Legge” really the writer of “Low
Life,” and, if so, who was “Tom Legge?” Mr. Peter Cunningham, or a
contributor to “Notes and Queries,” may be able to inform us. I have
been thus particular, for a reason: that this thin octavo is one of the
minutest, the most graphic—and while in parts coarse as a scene from the
“Rake’s Progress,”—the most pathetic, picture of London life a century
since that has ever been written. There are passages in it irresistibly
reminding one of Goldsmith; but the offensive and gratuitous coarseness
in the next page destroys _that_ theory. Our Oliver was pure. But for the
dedicatory epistle to the great painter prefixed, and which is merely a
screed of fulsome flattery, I could take an affidavit that “Low Life”
was written by William Hogarth. And why not, granting even the fulsome
dedication? Hogarth could have more easily written this calendar of
Town Life than the “Analysis of Beauty;” and the sturdy grandiloquent
little painter was vain enough to have employed some hack to write the
prefatory epistle, if, in a work of satire, he had chosen to assume the
anonymous. Perhaps, after all, the book was written by some clever,
observant, deboshed man out of Grub Street, who had been wallowing in the
weary London trough for years, and had eliminated at last some pearls
which the other swine were too piggish to discern. There, however, is
“Low Life.” If you want to know what London was really like in 1759, you
should study it by night and study it by day; and then you may go with
redoubled zest to your Fielding, Smollett, and Richardson, as one, after
a vigorous grind at his Greek verbs, may go to his Euripides, refreshed.
From this thin little octavo I need not say I borrowed the notion of
“Twice Round the Clock.” I chose a week-day instead of a Sunday, partly
for the sake of variety, partly because Sunday in London has become so
decorous as to be simply dull, and many of the hours would have been
utterly devoid of interest. I brooded fitfully over the scheme for many
months. At first I proposed to take my stand (in imagination) at King
Charles’s Statue, Charing Cross, and describe the Life revolving round me
during the twenty-four hours; but I should have trenched upon sameness by
confinement to singularity; and I chose at last all London as the theme
of description—

    “A mighty maze, but not without a plan.”

As a literary performance, this book must take its chance; and I fear
that the chance will not be a very favourable one. Flippant, pretentious,
superficial and yet arrogant of knowledge; verbose without being
eloquent; crabbed without being quaint; redundant without being copious
in illustration; full of paradoxes not extenuated by originality; and of
jocular expressions not relieved by humour—the style in which these pages
are written, combines the worst characteristics of the comic writers who
have been the “guides, philosophers and friends” of a whole school of
_quasi_ youthful authors in this era. I have reviewed too many would-be
comic books in my time, not to be able to pounce on the unsuccessful
attempts at humour in “Twice Round the Clock;” I have sufficient
admiration and respect for the genuine models of literary vigour and
elegance extant, not to feel occasionally disgusted with myself when I
have found the most serious topics discussed with a grotesque grimace
the while. It is a bad sign of the age—this turning of “cart-wheels” by
the side of a hearse, this throwing of somersaults over grave-stones.
The style we write in is popular now; but a few years, I hope, will see
a re-action, when a literary man must be either clown or undertaker, and
grinning through a horse-collar will not be tolerated in the case of a
mountebank otherwise attired in a shroud. Meanwhile, I cannot accuse
myself of pandering to a depraved taste. I neither follow nor lead it.
I cannot write otherwise than I do write. The leopard cannot change
his spots. Born in England, I am neither by parentage nor education
an Englishman; and in my childhood I browsed on a salad of languages,
which I would willingly exchange now for a plain English lettuce or
potato. Better to feed on hips and haws than on gangrened green-gages
and mouldy pine-apples. I read Sterne and Charles Lamb, Burton and Tom
Brown, Scarron and Brantôme, Boccaccio and Pigault-le-Brun, instead of
Mrs. Barbauld, and the Stories from the Spelling-book. I was pitchforked
into a French college before I had been through Pinnock in English; and
I declare that to this day I do not know one rule out of five in Lindley
Murray’s grammar. I can spell decently, because I can draw; and the
power (not the knowledge) in spelling correctly is concurrent with the
capacity for expressing the images before us more or less graphically
and symmetrically. It isn’t how a word _ought_ to be spelt: it is how
it _looks_ on paper, that decides the speller. I began to look upon the
quaint side of things almost as soon as I could see things at all; for
I was alone and Blind for a long time in childhood. I had so much to
whimper about, poor miserable object, that I began to grin and chuckle at
the things I saw, so soon as good Doctor Curée, the homœopathist, gave
me back my eyes. It is too late to mend now. While I am yet babbling, I
feel that I have nearly said my say. This book, as a Book, will go, and
be forgotten; but it will, years hence, acquire comparative value when
disinterred, from the “two-penny-box” at a bookstall. Old Directories,
Road Books, Court-Guides, Gazetteers, of half a century since, are worth
something now. They are as the straw that enters into the composition
of new bricks or books. Let us bide our time, then, my Augustus, humbly
but cheerfully. _You_ may have better fortune. You write novels and
tales: and the chronicles of Love never die. But if in the year 1959,
some historian of the state of manners in England during the reign of
Queen Victoria, points an allusion in a foot note by a reference to an
old book called “Twice Round the Clock,” and which professes to be a
series of essays on the manners and customs of the Londoners in 1859,
that reference will be quite enough of reward for your friend. Macaulay
quotes broadsides and Grub Street ballads. Carlyle does not disdain to
put the obscurest of North German pamphleteers into the witness-box;
albeit he often dismisses him with a cuff and a kick. At all events, we
may be quoted some of these days, dear Gus, even if we are kicked into
the bargain.

                                                     GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA.




CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

    FOUR A.M.—BILLINGSGATE MARKET                                        9

    FIVE A.M.—THE PUBLICATION OF THE “TIMES” NEWSPAPER                  25

    SIX A.M.—COVENT GARDEN MARKET                                       37

    SEVEN A.M.—A PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN                                    49

    EIGHT A.M.—ST. JAMES’S PARK—THE MALL                                65

    NINE A.M.—THE CLERKS AT THE BANK, AND THE BOATS ON THE RIVER        78

    TEN A.M.—THE COURT OF QUEEN’S BENCH, AND THE “BENCH” ITSELF         88

    ELEVEN A.M.—TROOPING THE GUARD, AND A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE        104

    NOON—THE JUSTICE-ROOM AT THE MANSION-HOUSE, AND THE “BAY TREE”     116

    ONE P.M.—DOCK LONDON AND DINING LONDON                             128

    TWO P.M.—FROM REGENT STREET TO HIGH CHANGE                         142

    THREE P.M.—DEBENHAM AND STORE’S AUCTION-ROOMS, AND THE PANTHEON
      BAZAAR                                                           158

    FOUR P.M.—TATTERSALL’S, AND THE PARK                               186

    FIVE P.M.—THE FASHIONABLE CLUB, AND THE PRISONERS’ VAN             200

    SIX P.M.—A CHARITY DINNER, AND THE NEWSPAPER WINDOW AT THE
      GENERAL POST-OFFICE                                              218

    SEVEN P.M.—A THEATRICAL GREEN-ROOM, AND “BEHIND THE SCENES”        235

    EIGHT P.M.—HER MAJESTY’S THEATRE, AND A PAWNBROKER’S SHOP          251

    NINE P.M.—HALF-PRICE IN THE NEW CUT, AND A DANCING ACADEMY         268

    TEN P.M.—A DISCUSSION AT THE “BELVIDERE,” AND AN ORATORIO AT
      EXETER HALL                                                      284

    ELEVEN P.M.—A SCIENTIFIC CONVERSAZIONE, AND AN EVENING PARTY       297

    MIDNIGHT—THE HAYMARKET, AND THE SUB-EDITOR’S ROOM                  317

    ONE A.M.—EVANS’S SUPPER-ROOMS, AND A FIRE                          330

    TWO A.M.—A LATE DEBATE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, AND THE
      TURNSTILE OF WATERLOO BRIDGE                                     357

    HOUR THE TWENTY-FOURTH AND LAST—THREE A.M.—A BAL MASQUE, AND
      THE NIGHT CHARGES AT BOW STREET                                  375




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


    PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR                                  _Frontispiece._

    FOUR A.M.—BILLINGSGATE MARKET: CARRYING FISH ASHORE            PAGE 17

    FOUR A.M.—BILLINGSGATE MARKET: THE FISH SOLD BY AUCTION             20

    FIVE A.M.—PUBLICATION OF THE “TIMES:” INSIDE THE OFFICE             32

    FIVE A.M.—PUBLICATION OF THE “TIMES:” OUTSIDE THE OFFICE            33

    SIX A.M.—COVENT GARDEN MARKET: THE WEST END                         41

    SIX A.M.—COVENT GARDEN MARKET: EARLY BREAKFAST STALL                44

    SEVEN A.M.—PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN: PLATFORM OF THE LONDON AND
      NORTH-WESTERN RAILWAY                                             60

    SEVEN A.M.—PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN: INTERIOR OF A THIRD-CLASS CARRIAGE  64

    EIGHT A.M.—ST. JAMES’S PARK                                         68

    EIGHT A.M.—OPENING SHOP                                             76

    NINE A.M.—OMNIBUSES AT THE BANK                                     84

    NINE A.M.—PENNY STEAMBOATS ALONGSIDE THE PIER AT LONDON BRIDGE      85

    TEN A.M.—INTERIOR OF THE COURT OF QUEEN’S BENCH                     96

    TEN A.M.—INTERIOR OF THE QUEEN’S BENCH PRISON                       97

    ELEVEN A.M.—TROOPING THE GUARD AT ST. JAMES’S PALACE               109

    ELEVEN A.M.—A WEDDING AT ST. JAMES’S CHURCH, PICCADILLY            113

    NOON—THE JUSTICE-ROOM AT THE MANSION HOUSE                         121

    ONE P.M.—DOCK-LABOURERS RETURNING TO WORK                          137

    ONE P.M.—DINING-ROOMS IN BUCKLERSBURY                              141

    TWO P.M.—REGENT STREET                                             148

    TWO P.M.—HIGH CHANGE                                               156

    THREE P.M.—DEBENHAM AND STORR’S AUCTION-ROOMS                      168

    THREE P.M.—THE PANTHEON BAZAAR                                     177

    FOUR P.M.—TATTERSALL’S                                             193

    FOUR P.M.—THE PARK                                                 197

    FIVE P.M.—THE FASHIONABLE CLUB                                     212

    FIVE P.M.—THE PRISONERS’ VAN                                       216

    SIX P.M.—A CHARITY DINNER                                          229

    SIX P.M.—THE NEWSPAPER WINDOW AT THE GENERAL POST-OFFICE           233

    SEVEN P.M.—A THEATRICAL GREEN-ROOM                                 244

    SEVEN P.M.—BEHIND THE SCENES                                       249

    EIGHT P.M.—THE OPERA                                               257

    EIGHT P.M.—INTERIOR OF A PAWNBROKER’S SHOP                         265

    NINE P.M.—HOUSE OF CALL FOR THE VICTORIA AUDIENCE                  276

    NINE P.M.—A DANCING ACADEMY                                        281

    TEN P.M.—A DISCUSSION AT THE “BELVIDERE”                           288

    TEN P.M.—AN ORATORIO AT EXETER HALL                                296

    ELEVEN P.M.—A SCIENTIFIC CONVERSAZIONE                             312

    ELEVEN P.M.—AN EVENING PARTY                                       316

    MIDNIGHT—SUPPER-ROOMS IN THE HAYMARKET                             325

    MIDNIGHT—THE SUB-EDITOR’S ROOM                                     329

    ONE A.M.—EVANS’S SUPPER-ROOMS                                      341

    ONE A.M.—A FIRE                                                    349

    TWO A.M.—A LATE DEBATE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS                     368

    TWO A.M.—THE TURNSTILE OF WATERLOO BRIDGE                          372

    THREE A.M.—A BAL MASQUE                                            381

    THREE A.M.—THE NIGHT CHARGES AT BOW STREET                         392




TWICE ROUND THE CLOCK; OR, THE HOURS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT IN LONDON.




FOUR O’CLOCK A.M.—BILLINGSGATE MARKET.


Reader, were you ever up all night? You may answer that you are neither
a newspaper editor, a market gardener, a journeyman baker, the driver
of the Liverpool night mail, Mrs. Gamp the sicknurse, the commander of
the Calais packet, Professor Airey, Sir James South, nor a member of the
House of Commons. It may be that you live at Clapham, that one of the
golden rules of your domestic economy is “gruel at ten, bed at eleven,”
and that you consider keeping late hours to be an essentially immoral and
wicked habit,—the immediate prelude to the career and the forerunner of
the fate of the late George Barnwell. I am very sorry for your prejudices
and your susceptibilities. I respect them, but I must do them violence. I
intend that—_bon gré, mal gré_—in spirit, if not in actual corporeality,
you should stop out not only all night but all day with me; in fact, for
the space of twenty-four hours, it is my resolve to prohibit your going
to bed at all. I wish you to see the monster LONDON in the varied phases
of its outer and inner life, at every hour of the day-season and the
night-season; I wish you to consider with me the giant sleeping and the
giant waking; to watch him in his mad noonday rages, and in his sparse
moments of unquiet repose. You must travel TWICE ROUND THE CLOCK with
me; and together we will explore this London mystery to its remotest
recesses—its innermost arcana. To others the downy couch, the tasselled
nightcap, the cushioned sofa, the luxurious ease of night-and-day rest.
Ours be the staff and the sandalled shoon, the cord to gird up the lions,
the palmer’s wallet and cockle-shells. For, believe me, the pilgrimage
will repay fatigue, and the shrine is rich in relics.

Four o’clock in the morning. The deep bass voice of Paul’s, the Staudigl
of bells, has growlingly proclaimed the fact. Bow church confirms the
information in a respectable baritone. St. Clement’s Danes has sung forth
acquiescence with the well-known chest-note of his tenor voice, sonorous
and mellifluous as Tamberlik’s. St. Margaret’s, Westminster, murmurs
a confession of the soft impeachment in a contralto rich as Alboni’s
in “Stridi la vampa;” and all around and about the pert bells of the
new churches, from evangelical Hackney to Puseyite Pimlico, echo the
announcement in their shrill treble and soprani.

Four o’clock in the morning. Greenwich awards it,—the Horse Guards allow
it—Bennett, arbiter of chronometers and clocks that, with much striking,
have grown blue in the face, has nothing to say against it. And that
self-same hour shall never strike again this side the trumpet’s sound.
The hour itself being consigned to the innermost pigeon-hole of the Dead
Hour office—(a melancholy charnel-house of misspent time is that, my
friend)—you and I have close upon sixty minutes before us ere the grim
old scythe-bearer, the saturnine child-eater, who marks the seconds and
the minutes of which the infinite subdivision is a pulsation of eternity,
will tell us that the term of another hour has come. That hour will be
five a.m., and at five it is high market at Billingsgate. To that great
piscatorial Bourse we, an’t please you, are bound.

It is useless to disguise the fact that you, my shadowy, but not the less
beloved companion, are about to keep very bad hours. Good to hear the
chimes at midnight, as Justice Shallow and Falstaff oft did when they
were students in Gray’s Inn; but four and five in the morning! these be
small hours indeed: this is beating the town with a vengeance. Were it
winter, our bedlessness would be indefensible; but this is still sweet
summer time.

But why, the inquisitive may ask—the child-man who is for ever cutting up
the bellows to discover the reservoir of the wind—why four o’clock a.m.?
Why not begin our pilgrimage at one a.m., and finish the first half at
midnight, in the orthodox get-up-and-go-to-bed manner? Simply because
four a.m. is in reality the first hour of the working London day. The
giant is wide awake at midnight; he sinks into a fitful slumber about
two in the morning: short is his rest, for at four he is up again and at
work, the busiest bee in the world’s hive.

The child of the Sun, the gorgeous golden peacock, strutting in a
farmyard full of the Hours, his hens, now triumphs. It is summer; and
more than that, a lovely summer morning. The brown night has retired,
and the meek-eyed moon, mother of dews, has disappeared: the young day
pours in apace; the mountains’ misty tops are swelling on the sight, and
brightening in the sun. It is the cool, the fragrant, and the silent
hour, to meditation due and sacred song; the air is coloured, the efflux
divine turns hovels into palaces, and shoots with gold the rags of
beggars.

    “The city now doth like a garment wear
      The beauty of the morning....
      Never did Sun more beautifully steep
    In his first splendour, valley, rock, or hill.
      Ne’er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep.
    The River glideth at its own sweet will;
      Dear God! the very houses seem asleep,
    And all that mighty Heart is lying still.”

I know that the acknowledgment of one’s quotations or authorities is
going out of fashion. Still, as I murmur the foregoing lines as I wander
round about the Monument and in and out of Thames Street, waiting for
Billingsgate-market time to begin, a conviction grows upon me that the
poetry is not my own; and in justice to the dead, as well as with a view
of sparing the printer a flood of inverted commas, I may as well confess
that I have been reading Mr. James Thomson and Mr. William Wordsworth on
the subject of summer lately, and that very many of the flowery allusions
to be found above, have been culled from the works of those pleasing
writers.

_Non omnis moriar._ Though the so oft-mentioned hours be asleep, and the
river glideth in peace, undisturbed by penny steamboats, the mighty heart
of Thames Street is anything but still. The great warehouses are closed,
’tis true; the long wall of the Custom House is a huge dead wall, full of
blind windows. The Coal Exchange (which edifice, with its gate down among
the dead men in Thames Street, and its cupola, like a middle-sized bully,
lifting its head to about the level of the base of that taller bully the
Monument, is the neatest example of an architectural “getting up stairs”
that I know)—the Coal Exchange troubles not its head as yet about
Stewarts or Lambtons, Sutherlands or Wallsend. The moist wharfs, teeming
with tubs and crates of potter’s ware packed with fruity store, and
often deliciously perfumed with the smell of oranges, bulging and almost
bursting through their thin prison bars of wooden laths, are yet securely
grated and barred up. The wharfingers are sleeping cosily far away. But
there are shops and shops wide open, staringly open, defiantly open, with
never a pane of glass in their fronts, but yawning with a jolly ha! ha!
of open-windowedness on the bye-strollers. These are the shops to make
you thirsty; these are the shops to make your incandescent coppers hiss;
these are the shops devoted to the apotheosis and apodeiknensis (I quote
Wordsworth again, but Christopher, not William) of Salt Fish—

    “Spend Herring first, save Salt Fish last,
    For Salt Fish is good when Lent is past.”

So old Tusser. What piles of salted fish salute the eye, and make
the mouth water, in these open-breasted shops! Dried herrings,
real Yarmouth bloaters, kippered herrings, not forgetting the old
original, unpretending red herring, the modest but savoury “soldier”
of the chandler’s-shop! What flaps of salt cod and cured fishes to me
unknown, but which may be, for aught I know, the poll of ling which
King James the First wished to give the enemy of mankind when he dined
with him, together with the pig and the pipe of tobacco; or it may be
Coob or Haberdine! What are Coob and Haberdine? Tell me, Groves, tell
me, Polonius, erst chamberlain and first fishmonger to the court of
Denmark. Great creels and hampers are there too, full of mussels and
periwinkles, and myriads of dried sprats and cured pilchards—shrunken,
piscatorial anatomies, their once burnished green and yellow panoplies
now blurred and tarnished. On the whole, each dried-fish shop is a most
thirst-provoking emporium, and I cannot wonder much if the blue-aproned
fishmongers occasionally sally forth from the midst of their fishy
mummy pits and make short darts “round the corner” to certain houses of
entertainment, kept open, it would seem, chiefly for their accommodation,
and where the favourite morning beverage is, I am given to understand,
gin mingled with milk. It is refreshing, however, to find that the
fragrant berry of Mocha (more or less adequately represented by chicory,
burnt horse-beans, and roasted corn)—that coffee, the nurse of Voltaire’s
wit, the inspirer of Balzac’s brain; coffee, which Madame de Sevigné
pertly predicted would “go out” with Racine, but which nevertheless has,
with astonishing tenacity of vitality, “kept in” while the pert Sevigné
and the meek Racine have quite gone out into the darkness of literary
limbo—is in great request among the fishy men of Billingsgate. Huge,
massive, blue and white earthenware mugs full of some brown decoction,
which to these not too exigent critics need but to steam, and to be
sweet, to be the “coffee as in France,” whose odoriferous “percolations”
the advertising tradesmen tell us of, are lifted in quick succession
to the thirsty lips of the fishmen. Observe, too, that all market men
drink and order their coffee by the “pint,” even as the scandal-loving
old ladies of the last century (ladies don’t love scandal now-a-days)
drank their tea by the “dish.” I can realise the contempt of a genuine
Billingsgate marketeer for the little thimble-sized filagree cups with
the bitter Mocha grouts at the bottom, which, with a suffocating Turkish
chibouque, Turkish pachas and attar-of-roses dealers in the Bezesteen,
offer as a mark of courtesy to a Frank traveller when they want to cheat
him.

Close adjacent is a narrow passage called Darkhouse Lane, and here
properly should be a traditional Billingsgate tavern called the
“Darkhouse.” There is one, open all night, under the same designation, in
Newgate Market. Hither came another chronicler of “twice round the clock”
with another neophyte, to show him the wonders of the town, one hundred
and fifty years ago. Hither, when pursy, fubsy, good-natured Queen Anne
reigned in England, and followed the hounds in Windsor’s Park, driving
two piebald ponies in a chaise, and touched children for the “evil,”
awing childish Sam Johnson with her black velvet and her diamonds, came
jovial, brutal, vulgar, graphic Ned Ward, the “London Spy.” Here, in the
“Darkhouse,” he saw a waterman knock down his wife with a stretcher, and
subsequently witnessed the edifying spectacle of the recreant husband
being tried for his offence by a jury of fishwomen. Scant mercy, but
signal justice, got he from those fresh-water Minoses and Rhadamanthuses.
Forthwith was he “cobbed”—a punishment invented by sleeveboard-wielding
tailors, and which subsequently became very popular in her Majesty’s
navy. Here he saw “fat, motherly flatcaps, with fish-baskets hanging over
their heads instead of riding-hoods,” with silver rings on their thumbs,
and pipes charged with “mundungus” in their mouths, sitting on inverted
eel-baskets, and strewing the flowers of their exuberant eloquence over
dashing young town rakes who had stumbled into Billingsgate to finish
the night—disorderly blades in laced velvet coats, with, torn ruffles,
and silver-hilted swords, and plumed hats battered in scuffles with the
watch. But the town-rakes kept comparatively civil tongues in their
heads when they entered the precincts of the Darkhouse. An amazon of the
market, otherwise known as a Billingsgate fish-fag, was more than a match
for a Mohock. And here Ned Ward saw young city couples waiting for the
tide to carry them in a tilt-boat to Gravesend; and here he saw bargemen
eating broiled red-herrings, and Welshmen “louscobby” (whatever that
doubtless savoury dish may have been, but there _must_ have been cheese
in it); and here he heard the frightful roaring of the waters among the
mechanism of the piers of old London Bridge. There are no waterworks
there now; the old bridge itself is gone; the Mohocks are extinct; and we
go to Gravesend by the steamer, instead of the tilt-boat; yet still, as
I enter the market, a pleasant cataract of “chaff” between a fishwoman
and a costermonger comes plashing down—even as Mr. Southey tells us that
the waters come down at Lodore—upon my amused ears; and the conviction
grows on me that the flowers of Billingsgate eloquence are evergreens.
Mem.: To write a philosophical dissertation on the connection between
markets and voluble vituperation which has existed in all countries and
in all ages. ’Twas only from his immense mastery of Campanian slang that
Menenius Agrippa obtained such influence over the Roman commons; and one
of the gaudiest feathers in Daniel O’Connell’s cap of eloquence was his
having “slanged” an Irish market-woman down by calling her a crabbed old
hypothenuse!

Billingsgate has been one of the watergates or ports of the city from
time immemorial. Geoffrey of Monmouth’s fabulous history of the spot
acquaints us that “Belin, a king of the Britons, about four hundred years
before Christ’s nativity, built this gate and called it ‘Belinsgate,’
after his own calling;” and that when he was dead, his body being burnt,
the ashes in a vessel of brass were set on a high pinnacle of stone
over the said gate. Stowe very sensibly observes, that the name was
most probably derived from some previous owner, “happily named Beling
or Biling, as Somars’ Key, Smart’s Wharf, and others, thereby took the
names of their owners.” When he was engaged in collecting materials for
his “Survey,” Billingsgate was a “large Watergate port, or harborough for
ships and boats commonly arriving there with fish, both fresh and salt,
shellfish, salt, oranges, onions, and other fruits and roots, wheat,
rye, and grain of divers sorts, for the service of the city, and the
parts of this realm adjoining.” Queenhithe, anciently the more important
watering-place, had yielded its pretensions to its rival. Each gives its
name to one of the city wards.

Some of the regulations concerning the “mystery” of the fishmongers in
old times are sufficiently interesting for a brief notice. In the reign
of Edward I. the prices of fish were fixed—for the best soles, 3_d._
per dozen; the best turbot, 6_d._ each; the best pickled herrings,
1_d._ a score; fresh oysters, 2_d._ a gallon; the best eels, 2_d._ per
quarter of a hundred. In a statute of Edward I. it was forbidden to
offer for sale any fish except salt fish after the second day. In the
city assize of fish the profits of the London fishmongers were fixed at
one penny in twelve. They were not to sell their fish secretly, within
doors, but in plain market-place. In 1320 a combination was formed
against the fishmongers of Fish-wharf, to prevent them from selling by
retail; but Edward II. ordered the mayor and sheriffs to interfere,
and the opposition was unsuccessful. The mayor issued his orders to
these fishmongers of Bridge Street and Old Fish Street, to permit their
brethren in the trade to “stand at stall;” to merchandise with them, and
freely obtain their share of merchandise, as was fit and just, and as the
freedom of the city required. A few years later some of the fishmongers
again attempted to establish a monopoly; but it was ordered that the
“billestres,” or poor persons who cried or sold fish in the streets,
“provided they buy of free fishmongers, and do not keep a stall, or make
a stay in the streets, shall not be hindered;” and also that persons and
women coming from the uplands with fish caught by them or their servants
in the waters of the Thames or other neighbouring streams, were to be
allowed to frequent the market. With these exceptions, none but members
of the Fishmongers’ Company were to be allowed to sell fish in the city,
lest the commodity should be made dear by persons dealing in it who were
unskilful in the mystery.

The old churches of London in the immediate vicinity of the fish-markets
contained numerous monuments to fishmongers. That the stock-fishmongers,
or dealers in dried or salted fish, should have formed so important
a portion of the trade is deserving of notice, as a peculiarity of
the times. Lovekin and Walworth, who both acquired wealth, were
stock-fishmongers. The nature of the commodity was such as to render the
dealers in it a superior class to the other fishmongers. A great store
might be accumulated, and more capital was required than by the other
fishmongers, who only purchased from hand to mouth.

In 1699, an act was passed for making it a free market for the sale of
fish—though the very commencement of the preamble alludes to Billingsgate
having been time out of mind a free market for all kinds of floating
and salt fish, as also for all manner of floating and shellfish. The
necessity of a new act had arisen, as the preamble recites, from various
abuses, one of which was that the fishmongers would not permit the street
hawkers of fish to buy of the fishermen, by which means the fishmongers
bought at their own prices. The extraordinary dream of making the country
wealthy, and draining the ocean of its riches by means of fisheries, had
for above a century been one of the fondest illusions of the English
people; and about the time that the act was passed, “ways to consume more
fish” were once more attracting the popular attention. The price of fish
at the time was said to be beyond the reach of the poor and even of the
middling classes; and for many days together the quantity received at
Billingsgate was very inconsiderable. To remedy these evils, carriages
were to be constructed, to be drawn by two post-horses, which were to
convey the fish to market at a rate of speed which was then thought to
be lightning rapidity. But though the project was much talked about,
it never came to a head, and ultimately fell through, the projectors
consoling themselves with the axiomatic reflection—that there are more
fish in the sea than ever came out of it.

But while I am rummaging among the dusty corners of my memory, and
dragging forth worm-eaten old books to the light; while I have suffered
the hare of the minute-hand, and the tortoise of the hour-hand (the
tortoise wins the race), to crawl or scamper at least half round the
clock, Billingsgate Market itself—the modern—the renovated—a far
different place to that uncleanly old batch of sheds and hovels, reeking
with fishy smells, and more or less beset by ruffianly company, which
was our only fish market twenty years ago—New Billingsgate, with a real
fountain in the centre, which during the day plays real water, is now
in full life and bustle and activity. Not so much in the market area
itself, where porters are silently busied in clearing piles of baskets
away, setting forms and stools in order, and otherwise preparing for
the coming business of the fish auction, as on the wharf, in front of
the tavern known to fame as Simpson’s, and where the eighteenpenny fish
ordinary is held twice every day, except Sunday, in each year of grace.
This wharf is covered with fish, and the scaly things themselves are
being landed, with prodigious celerity, and in quantities almost as
prodigious, from vessels moored in triple tier before the market. Here
are Dutch boats that bring eels, and boats from the north sea that bring
lobsters, and boats from Hartlepool, Whitstable, Harwich, Great Grimsby,
and other English seaports and fishing stations. They are all called
“boats,” though many are of a size that would render the term ship, or
at least vessel, far more applicable. They are mostly square and squat
in rigging, and somewhat tubby in build, and have an unmistakeably fishy
appearance. Communications are opened between the vessels, each other,
and the shore, by means of planks placed from bulwark to bulwark; and
these bulwarks are now trodden by legions of porters carrying the fish
ashore. Nautical terms are mingled with London street vernacular; fresh
mackerel competes in odour with pitch and tar; the tight strained rigging
cuts in dark indigo-relief against the pale-blue sky; the whole is a
confusion, slightly dirty but eminently picturesque, of ropes, spars,
baskets, oakum, tarpaulin, fish, canvas trousers, osier baskets, loud
voices, tramping feet, and “perfumed gales,” not exactly from “Araby the
blest,” but from the holds of the fishing-craft.

[Illustration: BILLINGSGATE MARKET: CARRYING FISH ASHORE.]

Upon my word, the clock has struck five, and the great gong of
Billingsgate booms forth market-time. Uprouse ye, then, my merry, merry
fishmongers, for this is your opening day! And the merry fishmongers
uprouse themselves with a vengeance. The only comparison I can find
for the aspect, the sights, and sounds of the place, is—a Rush. A
rush hither and thither at helter-skelter speed, apparently blindly,
apparently without motive, but really with a business-like and engrossing
pre-occupation, for fish and all things fishy. Baskets full of turbot,
borne on the shoulders of the _facchini_ of the place, skim through the
air with such rapidity that you might take them to be flying fish. Out of
the way! here is an animated salmon leap. Stand on one side! a shoal of
fresh herrings will swallow you up else. There is a rush to the tribunes
of the auctioneers; forums surrounded by wooden forms—I mean no pun—laden
with fish, and dominated by the rostra of the salesmen, who, with long
account-books in their hands, which they use instead of hammers, knock
down the lots with marvellous rapidity. An eager crowd of purchasers
hedge in the scaly merchandise. They are substantial-looking, hearty,
rosy-gilled men—for the sale of fish appears to make these merchants
thrive in person as well as in purse. Why, though, should fishmongers
have, as a body, small eyes? Can there be any mysterious sympathy between
them and the finny things they sell?—and do they, like the husband and
wife who loved each other so much, and lived together so long, that,
although at first totally dissimilar in appearance, they grew at last to
resemble one another feature for feature—become smaller and smaller-eyed
as their acquaintance with the small-eyed fishes lengthens? I throw this
supposition out as a subject for speculation for some future Lavater.
Among the buyers I notice one remarkable individual, unpretending as to
facial development, but whose costume presents a singular mixture of the
equine and the piscine. Lo! his hat is tall and shiny, even as the hat of
a frequenter of Newmarket and an _habitué_ of Aldridge’s Repository, and
his eminently sporting-looking neckcloth is fastened with a horse-shoe
pin; but then his sleeves are as the sleeves of a fishmonger, and his
loins are girt with the orthodox blue apron appertaining, by a sort of
masonic prescription, to his craft and mystery! His nether man, as far
as the spring of the calf, is clad in the galligaskins of an ordinary
citizen; but below the knee commence a pair of straight tight boots of
undeniably sporting cut. Who is this marvellous compound of the fishy
and “horsey” idiosyncrasies? Is he John Scott disguised as Izaak Walton?
is he Flatman or Chifney? Tell me, Mr. Chubb, proprietor of the “Golden
Perch;” tell me, “Ruff,” mythical author of the “Guide to the Turf”—for
knowing not to which authority especially to appeal, I appeal to both,
even as did the Roman maid-servant, who burnt one end of the candle to
St. Catherine and the other to St. Nicholas (old St. Nicholas I mean,
sometimes familiarised into “Nick”), in order to be on the safe side.

There are eight auctioneers or fish salesmen attached to the market,
and they meet every morning between four and five o’clock at one of the
principal public-houses, to discuss the quantity and quality of fish
about to be offered for sale. The three taverns are known as Bowler’s,
Bacon’s, and Simpson’s. The second of these is situated in the centre
of the market, and is habitually used by the auctioneers, probably on
account of the son of the proprietor being the largest consignee at
Billingsgate.

[Illustration: BILLINGSGATE: THE FISH SOLD BY AUCTION.]

As the clock strikes five, the auctioneers disperse to their various
boxes. Below each box are piled on “forms” or bulks the “doubles” of
plaice, soles, haddock, whiting, and “offal.” A “double” is an oblong
basket tapering to the bottom, and containing from three to four dozen
of fish; “offal” means odd lots of different kinds of fish, mostly small
and broken, but always fresh and wholesome. When the auctioneer is
ready, a porter catches up a couple of “doubles,” and swings one on to
each shoulder, and then the bids begin. Soles have been sold as low as
four shillings the “double,” and have fetched as high as three pounds.
There is one traditional bid on record, which took place in the early
part of the present century, of forty guineas per hundred for mackerel.
Plaice ranges from one-and-sixpence to four shillings the double. The
sale is conducted on the principle of what is termed a “Dutch auction,”
purchasers not being allowed to inspect the fish in the doubles before
they bid. Offal is bought only by the “fryers.” You may see, almost every
market morning, a long, gaunt, greasy man, of that dubious age that you
hesitate whether to call him youngish or oldish, with a signet ring on
one little finger, and a staring crimson and yellow handkerchief round
the collar of his not very clean checked shirt, buy from fifteen to
twenty doubles of one kind or another; and in the season the _habitués_
of the market say that he will purchase from twenty-five to thirty
bushels of periwinkles and whelks. This monumental “doubler,” this
Rothschild of the offal tribe, resides in Somers Town. To him resort to
purchase stock those innumerable purveyors of fried fish who make our
courts and bye-streets redolent with the oleaginous perfumes of their
hissing cauldrons. For the convenience of small dealers, who cannot
afford to buy an entire double, stands are erected at different parts of
the market for “bumbarees.” We may ask in vain, _undè derivatur_, for the
meaning of the term, though it is probably of Dutch origin. Any one can
be a bumbaree: it requires neither apprenticeship, diploma, nor license,
and it is the _pons asinorum_ of the “mystery of fishmongers.” The career
is open to all; which, considering the difficulty of settling one’s
children in life, must be rather a gratifying reflection for parents.
The process of bumbareeing is very simple. It consists in buying as
largely as your means will afford of an auctioneer, hiring a stall for
sixpence, and retailing the fish at a swingeing profit. I think that if
I were not a landed gentleman, a Middlesex magistrate, and a member of
the Court of Lieutenancy—vainly endeavouring, meanwhile, to ascertain my
parochial settlement, in order to obtain admission to a workhouse as an
unable-bodied pauper—that I should like to be a bumbaree.

Plaice, soles, haddocks (fresh), skate, maids, cod, and ling (the two
last-mentioned fish in batches of threes and fours, with a string passed
through the gills), are the only fish sold by auction. Fresh herrings are
sold from the vessel by the long hundred (130). They are counted from
the hold to the buyers in “warp” fives. Twopence per hundred is charged
to bring them on shore. Eels are sold by the “draft” of twenty pounds
weight—the price of the draft varying from three shillings to fifteen.
Twopence per draft is paid for “shoreing” or landing the fish from the
vessels. Sprats are sold on board the ships by the bushel. A “tindal” is
a thousand bushels of sprats. When we come to consider the vast number of
these oily, savoury little fishes that a bushel will contain, the idea
of a “tindal” of them seems perfectly Garagantuan; yet many “tindals” of
them are sold every week during the winter season—for the consumption of
sprats among the poorer classes is enormous. What says the Muse of the
Bull at Somers Town—what sweet stanzas issue from the anthology of Seven
Dials?—

    “O! ’tis my delight on a Friday night,
      When sprats they isn’t dear,
    To fry a couple of score or so
      Upon a fire clear.

    “They eats so well, they bears the bell
      From all the fish I knows:
    Then let us eat them while we can,
      Before the price is rose.”
        (Chorus—ad libitum) “O! ’tis my delight,” &c.

The last two lines are replete with the poetry and philosophy of the
poorer classes: “Let us eat them while we can, before the price is rose;”
for even sprats are sometimes luxuries unattainable by the humble.
Exceedingly succulent sprats labour under the disadvantage of being
slightly unwholesome. To quote Mr. Samuel Weller’s anecdote of the remark
made by the young lady when remonstrating with the pastrycook who had
sold her a pork pie which was all fat, sprats are “rayther too rich.”
And yet how delicious they are! I have had some passably good dinners
in my time; I have partaken of _turbôt à la crême_ at the Trois Frères
Provençaux; I have eaten a _filet à la Chateaubriand_ at Bignon’s: yet
I don’t think there is a banquet in the whole repertory of Lucullus and
Apicius—a more charming red-letter night in the calendar of gastronomy,
than a sprat supper. You must have three pennyworth of sprats, a large
tablecloth is indispensable for finger-wiping purposes—for he who would
eat sprats with a knife and fork is unworthy the name of an epicure—and
after the banquet I should recommend, for purely hygienic and antibilious
reasons, the absorption of a _petit verre_ of the best Hollands.

To return. As regards salmon, nine-tenths of the aristocratic fish are
brought up by rail in barrels, and in summer packed in ice. Salmon and
salmon-trout are not subjected to the humiliation of being “knocked
down” by an auctioneer. They are disposed of “by private contract” at so
much per pound.

Of dried and smoked fish of all kinds the best come from Yarmouth; but
as regards the costermonger and street-vender—the modern “billestres,”
of dried haddocks, smoked sprats and herrings, entire or kippered—they
are little affected by the state of the cured fish market so long as they
can buy plenty of the fresh kind. The costermonger cures his fish himself
in the following manner:—He builds a little shed like a watch-box, with
wires across the upper part; and on this grating he threads his fish.
Then he makes a fire on the floor of his impromptu curing-house with coal
or mahogany dust, and smokes the fish “till done,” as the old cookery
books say. There is a dealer in the market to whom all fish-sellers
bring the skins of departed soles. He gives fourpence-halfpenny a pound
for them. They are used for refining purposes. And now for a word
concerning the crustacea and the molluscs. Of oysters there are several
kinds: Native Pearls, Jerseys, Old Barleys, and Commons. On board every
oyster-boat a business-like gentleman is present, who takes care that
every buyer of a bushel of oysters pays him fourpence. No buyer may carry
his oysters ashore himself, be he ever so able and willing. There are
regular “shoremen,” who charge fourpence a bushel for their services; so
that whatever may be the market-price of oysters, the purchaser must pay,
_nolens volens_, eightpence a bushel over and above the quoted rate.

Of mussels there are three kinds: Dutch, Exeters, and Shorehams. They are
brought to market in bags, of the average weight of three hundredweight;
each bag containing about one hundred and sixty quarts, inclusive of dirt
and stones. They are sold at from five shillings to seven shillings a
bag. Of periwinkles—or, as they are more popularly and familiarly termed,
“winkles”—there are four sorts: Scotch, Clays, Isle of Wights, and
Maidens. They are sold by the bushel, or by the “level” or gallon. Crabs
are sold by the “kit” (a long shallow basket) and by the score. Lobsters
by the score and the double.

At the “Cock,” in Love Lane, and at the “White Hart,” in Botolph Lane,
there is a boiling-house in the rear of the premises. Each boiling-house
consists of a spacious kitchen filled with immense cauldrons. Here winkle
and whelk buyers, who have neither utensils nor convenient premises
sufficient to boil at home, can have it done for them for fourpence
a bushel. Each boiling is performed separately in a wicker-basket;
crabs and lobsters may likewise be boiled at these houses. Half-a-dozen
scores of the fish are packed in a large basket, shaped like a
strawberry-pottle, a lid is put between each lot, and the hot-water
torture is inflicted at the rate of sixpence a score.

If your servant, the writer, were not precluded by the terms of his
contract from taking any natural rest, he might, pleading fatigue, retire
to bed; and, tossing on an unquiet couch, as men must do who slip between
the sheets when the blessed sun is shining, have fantastic dreams of Ned
Ward and Sir William Walworth: dream of the market-scene in “Masaniello,”
and hum a dream-reminiscence of “Behold, how brightly beams the morning!”
which, of course, like all things appertaining to dreams, has no more
resemblance to the original air than the tune the cow died of. Then
fancy that he is a supernumerary in a pantomime, and that Mr. Flexmore,
the clown, has jumped upon his shoulders, and is beating him about the
ears with a “property” codfish. Then he might be Jonah, swallowed by the
whale; and then Tobit’s fish. Then he would find himself half awake, and
repeating some lines he remembered reading years ago, scrawled in ink on
a huge placard outside the shop of Mr. Taylor, the famous fishmonger, in
Lombard Street. Yes: they ran thus—

    “So the ‘Times’ takes an interest in the case of Geils;
    I wish it would take some in my eels!”

What a queer fish Mr. Taylor must have been! Where is he now? Why,
he (your servant) is Taylor—Jeremy Taylor—Tom Taylor—Taylor the
water-poet—Billy Taylor—the Three Tailors of Tooley Street—Mr. Toole, the
toast-master of arts and buttered toast; and—he is asleep!




FIVE O’CLOCK A.M.—THE PUBLICATION OF THE “TIMES” NEWSPAPER.


    “There she is—the great engine—she never sleeps. She has her
    ambassadors in every quarter of the world—her couriers upon
    every road. Her officers march along with armies, and her
    envoys walk into statesmen’s cabinets. They are ubiquitous.
    Yonder Journal has an agent at this minute giving bribes at
    Madrid; and another inspecting the price of potatoes at Covent
    Garden.”

                                                        “PENDENNIS.”

If you have no objection to the statement of the fact, I would beg to
observe that our present station on the clock face, twice round which
we have to go, is now five in the morning; and that at five a.m. the
publication of the “Times” newspaper is, to use a north-country mining
expression, in “full blast.” You abhor the politics of the journal
in question, you say: you consider the “Times” and “Evening Mail” to
be the organ of a company, with limited liability, composed of the
Emperor Alexander, Cardinal Wiseman, Baron Rothschild, Prince Aali
Pacha, Metternich, Doctor Cumming, Baring Brothers, Lord Palmerston,
Mr. Disraeli, Mr. W. J. Fox, and Miss Martineau. You are offended with
the “Times” because the editor declined to insert that last six-paged
letter from you against organ grinding. Never mind, you must come all
the same to see the paper published. For the publication of the “Times”
is a great, an enormous, a marvellous fact: none the less wonderful for
being repeated three hundred and thirteen times a-year. It is a pulsation
of London’s mighty heart, that should not be neglected. It is the daily
booming of a tocsin, which, year after year, proclaims progress, and
still progress to the nations; which is the joy bell to the good, the
passing bell to the bad, the world is blessed or cursed with; which rings
out ignorance and prejudice and superstition, and rings in knowledge
and enlightenment and truth. The “Times” is not alone in the possession
of a peal of bells of this kind; and many daily, more weekly, papers
ring out, loud and clear, to eager listeners; were your vassal not one
of the modestest of men, he would hint that for the last dozen years he
has been agitating daily and weekly a little tintinnabulum with what
lustiness his nerveless arm will let him. But hard by St. Paul’s, the
cathedral of Anglicanism, is Printing House Square, the cathedral of
Journalism, and in it hangs a bell to which Great Tom of Lincoln, Peter
of York, the Kolokol of Moscow, and our own defunct “Big Ben,” are but
as tinkling muffineers. For though the sides of the bell are only paper,
the clapper is the great public tongue; the booming sound that fills the
city every morning, and, to use the words of Mr. Walter Whitman, “utters
its barbaric youp over the house-tops of creation,” is the great Public
Voice. Bottle up your animosities, then, stifle your prejudices, and come
and hear the voice’s first faint murmur at five o’clock in the morning.

The office of the “Times” and “Evening Mail” is, as all civilised men
should know, situated in Printing House Square and Playhouse Yard, in the
parish of St. Ann’s, Blackfriars, in the city of London. Now this is very
pleasant and comfortable information, and is fit matter for a studious
man to lay to heart; and there exists but one little drawback to mar the
felicity which one must naturally feel at having the style and title of
the press’s great champions’ _habitat_ so patly at one’s fingers’ ends.
The drawback—the kink in the cable, the hyssop in the wine-cup, the thorn
to the rose—is that, with the exception of Honey Lane market and Little
Chester Street, Pimlico, Printing House Square is the most difficult
locality to find in all London. It is not much use asking your way to
it; a map of London, however elaborate, would not be of the slightest
assistance to you in discovering it: it will avail you little even to be
told that it is close to Apothecaries’ Hall, for where, I should like
to know, is that huge musty caravanserai of drugs, and who is to find
it at a short notice? And the intimation that Printing House Square is
not far from Puddle Dock, would not, I opine, render you great service,
intimate as might be your acquaintance with the shores of the river, both
above and below bridge, and would be scarcely more lucid a direction
than the intimation that the London terminus of the South-Western
Railway was close to Pedlars’ Acre. The “Times” newspaper is somewhere
near all these places; and it is likewise within a stone’s throw from
Ludgate Hill, and not far from St. Paul’s, and within a minute’s walk of
Fleet Street, and contiguous to Blackfriars Bridge, close handy to Earl
Street, and no great distance from Chatham Place. Yet, for all this,
the “Times” office might be, to the uninitiated, just as well placed in
the centre of the Cretan labyrinth, or the maze at Hampton Court, or
the budget of a Chancellor of the Exchequer. The best way to reach the
office is to take any turning to the south side of London Bridge, or
the east of Bridge Street, Blackfriars, and then trust to chance. The
probabilities are varied. Very likely you will find yourself entangled
in a seemingly hopeless net-work of narrow streets; you will be jostled
into chandlers’ shops, vilified by boys unctuous, black, and reeking
from the printing-machine; pursued by costermongers importuning you to
purchase small parcels of vegetables; and, particularly after sundown,
your life will be placed in jeopardy by a Hansom cab bouncing up or down
the narrow thoroughfare, of course on its way to the “Times” office,
and on an errand of life and death; the excited politician inside,
frantically offering the cabman (he, even, doesn’t know the way to the
“Times,” and has just asked it of a grimy cynic, smoking a pipe in front
of a coal and potato shed) extra shillings for speed. The grimy cynic,
perhaps from sheer malevolence of disposition, perhaps from the ruffling
of his temper naturally incidental to his being asked the same question
about five hundred times every day, answers morosely that he believes
the Hoffice is in Bummondsey, but he’s blest if he knows hanything more
about it. He will have bad times of it, that grimy cynic, I perpend,
for telling such fibs. Still struggle on manfully, always like the
nautical gentleman in the blue pilot jacket who had had so many domestic
afflictions, and exhorted the passenger to “go down, go down.” Never mind
the regiments of gallinacea that board in the gutter and lodge in the
adjacent coal-cellars, and peck at your feet as though they could relish
your corns. Never mind the infants of tender years who come tumbling
between your legs, sprawl, howling, at your feet, and cast around
appealing glances, which draw cries of “shame!” from vengeful family-men
who have never set eyes on you before, but who evidently regard you as a
peripatetic ogre, going about, of malice prepense, to trip up children.
Never mind the suffocating odour of second-hand fish, vegetables, fruit,
coal-dust, potato sacks, the adjacent gasworks, gum-benzoin, hartshorn,
opium, and other medicaments from Apothecaries’ Hall. Never mind the
noises of dogs barking, of children that are smacked by their parents
or guardians for crying, and then, of course, roar louder; of boys
yelling the insufferable “Old Dog Tray,” the abominable “Keemo Kimo,” the
hideous “Hoomtoomdoodendoo,” and rattling those abhorrent instruments
of discord, the “bones;” of women scolding, quarrelling, or shrieking
domestic calumnies of Mrs. Armstrong in connection with Bill Boosker,
nicknamed the “Lively Flea,” from garret-windows across the street; of
men growling, and wagon-wheels rumbling, and from distant forges the
yell of the indignant anvil as the ruthless hammer smites it, and the
great bar of iron is beaten flat, the sparks flying up, rejoicing in a
red “ha-ha!” at the ferruginous defeat. Never mind the dangers of hoop,
“hopscotch,” “fly-the-garter,” “thread-the-needle,” “trip-the-baker,”
“tipcat,” and “shove-halfpenny,” for the carrying out of which exciting
and amusing games the juvenile population entirely monopolise what spare
strips of pavement there are. Trust on, be not afraid, keep struggling;
and it is five hundred to one that you will eventually turn up Printing
House Square, over against the “Times” office. How ever the leviathan of
the press manages to breathe in this close, stifling, elbow-hampering
neighbourhood, has always puzzled me, and has puzzled, I daresay, a great
many wiser than I. How do the archbishops in their coaches and six (it
is well known that those gorgeous prelates write the leading articles,
carrying the necessary stationery in their mitres, and wiping their pens
on their black silk aprons—the B—p of O—x—d, however, always writes with
a pastoral crozier, dipped in milk and honey, or a lamb’s fleece—and
come down to the office at a quarter past nine every evening to correct
their proofs) contrive to squeeze their broad-shouldered equipages
through these bye-lanes? How can the sub-editor’s four-in-hand pass, the
city correspondent’s comfortable yellow chariot, nay, even the modest
broughams of the compositors? Why does not the “Times” burst forth from
the shell it has grown too large for, and plant its standard on the hill
of Ludgate, or by the side of Cheap,—if it must needs be in the city? The
area of Lincoln’s Inn Fields would be perhaps the most suitable locality
for a new office; but it is indubitable that unless the “leading journal”
retrogress and contract its operation, they will have, some day, to pull
down the choking little nests of back-streets which surround and hem it
in, even as they had to pull down the wall of the dock, bodily, in order
to let the _Great Britain_ steam-ship out.

What a contrast sequestered Printing House Square, with its old-fashioned
aspect, its quiet, dingy-looking houses, its clump of green trees within
a railing to the left, presents to the gurgling, gasping neighbourhood
which stands in such close propinquity to it! Here is the great brainpan
of journalism; the centre of newspaper activity, the prefecture of
police of the public press. Absolutely necessary is it that it should
be entirely a secret police, the “awful, shadowy, irresponsible, and
yet _puissant_ we” should dominate over the columns of the daily
journal. Will a time ever come, I wonder, when a man will sign his own
articles in a newspaper; receive his reward for honesty, his censure
for tergiversation, from the public? Will a strange day of revolution
ever arrive, when the mystic “we” shall be merged into the responsible,
tax-paying, tangible, palpable, shootable, suicidable, and kickable “I?”
Perhaps never; perhaps such a consummation would be disastrous. Old
Cobbett, in one of his screeds of passionate contempt in his “gridiron”
paper the “Register,” once said that he should like to have all the
newspaper editors and correspondents in London assembled in Hyde Park,
in order that from their personal appearance the public might judge
by what a disreputable-looking set of fellows they were hoodwinked
and nose-led. There would be no need to hold such a gathering in this
scene-painting age. Walk but into any fashionable photographic studio,
and you shall find all the “sommités” of the press neatly collectionised,
and stuck on pasteboard in the show-room portfolio; and if you entreat
the photographer’s pretty wife civilly, she will point out to you
Doctor Copperbolt of the “Thunderer,” and Bill Hornblower of the “Penny
Trumpet,” in their habit as they live.

Printing House Square is to me interesting at all times of the day and
night. In the afternoon, the dullest period of its existence, when the
compositors are gone away, the editors not come, the last number of the
last edition of the day’s sheet printed, and the mighty steam-engine
for a time hushed, I wander into its precincts often; make some small
pretexts of taking out a slip of paper, and wending my way towards the
advertising department; but soon retrace my steps, and, to tell the
truth, moon about the square in such a suspicious and prowling manner,
that if they kept any spoons on the premises, I should most probably be
ordered off by the compositor on duty. This was Playhouse Yard too, once,
was it—nay, is still; but where is the old playhouse—the Globe Theatre,
Blackfriars, if I mistake not? Not a vestige, not a particle remains.
The fourth estate has swallowed it all up. The Press Dragon of Wantley
has devoured everything; and the “Times” seems omnipotent in its home by
Puddle Dock. Look over the door of the advertisement office. Above that
portal is a handsome marble slab, a votive tablet, in commemoration of a
great victory the “Times” once gained, not a legal victory, but one of
power and influence with the people, and especially with the commercial
community, by its exposure, anent the trial of Bogle _v._ Lawson, of the
most extensive and remarkable fraudulent conspiracy ever brought to light
in the mercantile world. The “Times” refused to be reimbursed for the
heavy costs with which its proprietors had been saddled in defending the
action brought by Mr. Bogle, a banker at Florence, against the publisher
of the “Times,” Mr. Lawson. But a subscription, amounting to £2,700, had
been raised, and this handsome sum, which the “Times” proprietors refused
to accept, was at last laid out in the foundation of two scholarships
at Christ’s Hospital and the City of London School, for the benefit of
pupils of those institutions proceeding to the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge. Do you remember—are you old enough to remember—the famous
case of Bogle _versus_ Lawson, reader? It would take me five times the
space I can spare for this paper to give you even the outline of the
history of the monstrous fraud from which that action grew. Suffice
it now to say, that Mr. Bogle had been mixed up—it has been since
established innocently—in the great continental letter of credit forging
system, invented, carried out, and pursued with consummate success by an
accomplished scoundrel, the Marquis de Bourbel, who, when the felonious
bubble at length burst, and the fraud was detected, was in nowise cast
down or abashed by that discovery that had come, and the punishment that
seemed imminent, but with admirable strategy called in his outlying
pickets of countesses, actresses—_demi-monde_ adventuresses—couriers,
and sham English milords, who had been scouring the Continent changing
his forged letters of credit, and, after the unutterable impudence of
an appearance in court during the “Times” trial, gracefully retired
into private life. I, the scribe, _moi qui vous parle_, have lived in
the same house with this great man. It was at a hairdresser’s shop in
the Regent’s Quadrant, and in an upper chamber of the house in question
did the gallant marquis, assisted by a distinguished countess, who had
formerly danced on stilts, and an English copper-plate engraver, work
off the proofs of his wicked paper money from the counterfeited plates.
I should like to know what became eventually of the Marquis de Bourbel:
whether his lordship was, in the ripeness of his time, guillotined,
garotted, hanged, or knouted. I go for Siberia and the knout, for, from
the peculiar conformation of his lordship’s character, I don’t think it
possible that he could have refrained for long from forgery. We should
have heard of him, I think, had he come to grief in Western Europe;
but Russian bank-notes are very easy to forge, and Russian prisons and
prisoners are seldom brought before the public eye. They manage those
little things better, and keep them nice and cozy and quiet; and so I go
for Siberia and the knout.

It is, however, as the shades of evening gather round the _Cour des
Miracles_ which encompasses the “Times” office, that the scene which
it and the Square present becomes more interesting. For early in the
evening that giant steam-engine begins to throb, and, as the hour
advances, the monster is fed with reams on reams of stout white paper,
which he devours as though they were so many wafers.[1] It gets late at
Printing House Square; the sub-editors have been for some time in their
rooms; the ineffable mysteries of the “Times”—editors, proprietors,
cabinet ministers, lord chancellors, generals of the Jesuits, for aught I
know, have arrived from their clubs in broughams and in cabs. Who shall
tell? That stout good-humoured looking gentleman with the umbrella and
the ecclesiastical neckcloth, may be the writer of the comic leading
articles, just arrived with his copy. No; he has vainly tried the door
of the advertisement office, which is closed. Perhaps he is only X.
Y. Z., who, in the second column, entreats P. Q. R. to return to his
disconsolate parents; or the inventor of some new tooth-powder with a
Greek name, or the discoverer of the “fourteen shilling trousers.” It is
getting later, and the windows of the great office are all blazing with
gas. The steam-engine not only throbs; it pants, it groans, it puffs, it
snorts, it bursts into a wild, clanging pæan of printing. Sub-editors
are now hard at work cutting down “flimsy,” ramming sheets of “copy” on
files, endlessly conferring with perspiring foremen. Ineffable mysteries
(I presume) are writing terribly slaughtering articles in carpeted rooms,
by the light of Argand lamps. Do they have cake and wine, I wonder,
in those rooms? Sherry and sandwiches, perhaps, and on field-nights
lobsters. It is getting later, but there is no sign of diminution yet in
the stream of cabs that drive into the Square. Every one who is in debt,
and every one who is in difficulties, and everybody who fancies that he,
or any friend, relation, or connection of his, has a grievance, and can
put pen to paper, four letters together in orthography and four words in
syntax, must needs write a letter to the “Times;” and of the metropolitan
correspondents of that journal, the immense majority themselves bring
their letters down to the office, thinking, haply, that they might
meet the editor standing “promiscuous” on the door-step, and after
some five minutes’ button-holding, secure, irrevocably, the insertion
of their communications. I don’t at all envy the gentleman whose duty
it is to open and read (do they read them all?) the letters addressed
to the editor of the “Times”. What quires of insane complaints, on
matters running from the misdelivery of a letter to the misgovernment
of India, from the iniquities of the income-tax to an overcharge for a
sandwich in a country inn, that editor must have to wade through; what
reams of silly compliments about “your influential journal,” and “your
world-known paper,” he must have to read, and grin in his sleeve at! What
a multitudinous army, what a Persian host, these correspondents must be!
Who are they?—the anonymous ones—what are they like? Who is “Verax?” who
“Paterfamilias?” who “Indophilus?” who “The London Scoundrel?” who “A
Thirsty Soul?” When will Mr. Herbert Watkins photograph me a collection
of portraits of “Constant Readers,” “Englishmen,” and “Hertfordshire
Incumbents?” Where is the incumbency of that brilliant writer? Who is
“_Habitans in Sicco_,” and how came he first to date from the “Broad
Phylactery?” and where does “Jacob Omnium” live when he is at home? I
should like to study the physiognomy of these inveterate letter writers;
to be acquainted with the circumstances which first led them to put pen
to paper in correspondence with the “Times;” to know how they like to
see themselves in print, and also how they feel, when, as happens with
lamentable frequency, their lucubrations don’t get printed at all.

[Illustration: PUBLICATION OF THE “TIMES” NEWSPAPER: INSIDE THE OFFICE.]

[Illustration: PUBLICATION OF THE “TIMES” NEWSPAPER: OUTSIDE THE OFFICE.]

It is getting later and later, oh! anxious waiters for to-morrow’s
news. The “Times” has its secrets by this time. State secrets, literary
secrets, secrets artistic and dramatic; secrets of robbery, and fire,
and murder—it holds them all fast now, admitting none to its confidence
but the Ineffables, the printers, and the ever-throbbing steam-engine;
but it will divulge its secrets to millions at five o’clock to-morrow
morning. Later and later still. The last report from the late debate
in the Commons has come in; the last paragraph of interesting news,
dropped into the box by a stealthy penny-a-liner, has been eliminated
from a mass of flimsy on its probation, and for the most part rejected;
the foreign telegrams are in type; the slaughtering leaders glare in
their “chases,” presaging woe and disaster to ministers to-morrow; the
last critic, in a white neckcloth, has hurried down with his column
and a-half on the last new spectacle at the Princess’s; or has, which
very frequently happens, despatched that manuscript from the box at the
“Albion,” where he has been snugly supping, bidding the messenger hasten,
and giving him to procure a cab the sum of one extra shilling, which that
messenger never by any chance expends in vehicular conveyance, but runs
instead with the art-criticism, swift as the timid roe, so swift indeed,
that policemen are only deterred through chronic laziness from pursuing
and asking whether he hasn’t been stealing anything. By this time the
“Times” has become tight and replete with matter, as one who has dined
well and copiously. Nothing is wanting: city correspondence, sporting
intelligence, markets, state of the weather, prices of stocks and railway
shares, parliamentary summary, law and police reports, mysterious
advertisements, and births, deaths, and marriages. Now let the nations
wonder, and the conductors of the mangy little continental fly-sheets
of newspapers hide their heads in shame, for the “Times”—the mighty
“Times”—has “gone to bed.” The “forms,” or iron-framed and wedged-up
masses of type, are, in other words, on the machine; and, at the rate of
twelve thousand an hour, the damp broad sheets roll from the grim iron
instrument of the dissemination of light throughout the world.

At five o’clock a.m., the first phase of the publication of the “Times”
newspaper commences. In a large bare room—something like the receiving
ward of an hospital—with a pay counter at one end, and lined throughout
with parallel rows of bare deal tables, the “leading journal” first
sees the light of publicity. The tables are covered with huge piles
of newspapers spread out the full size of the sheet. These are, with
dazzling celerity, folded by legions of stout porters, and straightway
carried to the door, where cabs, and carts, and light express phæton-like
vehicles, are in readiness to convey them to the railway stations.
The quantity of papers borne to the carriages outside by the stout
porters seems, and truly is, prodigious; but your astonishment will
be increased when I tell you that this only forms the stock purchased
every morning by those gigantic newsagents, Messrs. Smith and Son, of
the Strand. As the largest consumers, the “Times” naturally allows them
a priority of supply, and it is not for a considerable period after
they have received their orders that the great body of newsagents and
newsvenders—the “trade,” as they are generically termed—are admitted,
grumbling intensely, to buy the number of quires or copies which they
expect to sell or lend that day. The scene outside then becomes one of
baffling noise and confusion. There is a cobweb of wheeled vehicles
of all sorts, from a cab to a hybrid construction something between a
wheelbarrow and a costermonger’s shallow. There is much bawling and
flinging, shoving, hoisting, pulling and dragging of parcels; all the
horses’ heads seem to be turned the wrong way; everybody’s off-wheel
seems locked in somebody else’s; but the proceedings on the whole are
characterised by much good-humour and some fun. The mob of boys—all
engaged in the news-trade—is something wonderful: fat boys, lean boys,
sandy-haired and red-haired boys, tall boys and short boys, boys with red
comforters (though it is summer), and boys with sacks on their backs and
money-bags in their hands; boys with turn-down collars; and boys whose
extreme buttonedupness renders the fact of their having any shirts to put
collars to, turn-down or stuck-up, grievously problematical. Hard-working
boys are these juvenile Bashi-Bazouks of the newspaper trade. And I am
glad to observe, for the edification of social economists, with scarcely
an exception, very honest boys. I don’t exactly say that they are trusted
with untold gold, but of the gold that is told, to say nothing of the
silver and copper, they give a generally entirely satisfactory account.
At about half-past seven the cohorts of newsvenders, infantry and
cavalry, gradually disperse, and the “Times” is left to the agonies of
its second edition.

As you walk away from Printing House Square in the cool of the morning,
and reflect, I hope with salutary results, upon the busy scene you
have witnessed, just bestow one thought, and mingle with it a large
meed of admiration, for the man who, in his generation, truly made the
“Times” what it is now—John Walter, of Bearwood, Member of Parliament.
Foul-mouthed old Cobbett called him “Jack Walters,” and him and his
newspaper many ungenteel names, predicting that he should live to
see him “earthed,” and to “spit upon his grave;” but he survived the
vituperative old man’s coarse epithets. He put flesh on the dry bones of
an almost moribund newspaper. He, by untiring and indomitable energy and
perseverance, raised the circulation of the “Times” twenty-fold, and put
it in the way of attaining the gigantic publicity and popularity which it
has now achieved. It is true that Mr. Walter realised a princely fortune
by his connection with the “Times,” and left to his son, the present Mr.
John Walter, M.P., a lion’s share in the magnificent inheritance he had
created. But he did much solid good to others besides himself. This brave
old pressman, who, when an express came in from Paris—the French king’s
speech to the Chambers in 1835—and when there were neither contributors
nor compositors to be found at hand, bravely took off his coat, and in
his shirt-sleeves first translated, and then, taking “a turn at case,”
proceeded to set up in type his own manuscript. Mr. Walter was one of
the pioneers of liberal knowledge; and men like him do more to clear
the atmosphere of ignorance and prejudice, than whole colleges full of
scholiasts and dialecticians.




SIX O’CLOCK A.M.—COVENT GARDEN MARKET.


An Emperor will always be called Cæsar, and a dog “poor old fellow,”
in whatever country they may reign or bark, I suppose; and I should
be very much surprised if any men of Anglo-Saxon lineage, from this
time forward to the millennium, could build a new city in any part
of either hemisphere without a street or streets named after certain
London localities, dear and familiar to us all. There is a Pall Mall in
Liverpool, though but an unsavoury little thoroughfare, and a Piccadilly
in Manchester—a very murky, bricky street indeed, compared with that
unequalled hill of London, skirted on one side by the mansions of the
nobles, and on the other by the great green parks. Brighton has its
Bond Street—_mutatus ab ille_, certainly, being a fourth-rate skimping
little place, smelling of oyster-shells, sand, recently-washed linen, and
babies. I question not but in far-off Melbourne and Sydney, and scarcely
yet planned cities of the Bush, the dear old names are springing up,
like shoots from famous trees. Antipodean legislators have a refreshment
room they call “Bellamy’s;” merchants in far-off lands have their
“Lloyd’s;” there are coffee-houses and taverns, thousands of miles away,
christened “Joe’s,” and “Tom’s,” and “Sam’s,” though the original “Joe,”
the primeval “Tom,” the first “Sam,” most bald-headed and courteous of
old port-wine-wise waiters, have long since slept the sleep of the just
in quiet mouldy London graveyards, closed years ago by the Board of
Health. On very many names, and names alone, we stamp _esto perpetua_;
and English hearts would ill brook the alteration of their favourite
designations. Long, long may it be, I hope, before the great Lord Mayor
of London shall be called the Prefect of the Thames, or the Secretary of
State for the Home Department be known as the Minister of the Interior!

Foremost among names familiar to British mouths is Covent Garden. The
provincial knows it; the American knows it; Lord Macaulay’s New Zealander
will come to meditate among the moss-grown arcades, when he makes that
celebrated sketching excursion we have so long been promised. To the
play-goer Covent Garden is suggestive of the glories of Kemble and
Siddons; old book-a-bosom studious men, who live among musty volumes,
remember that Harry Fielding wrote the “Covent Garden Journal;” that
Mr. Wycherley lived in Bow Street; and that Mr. Dryden was cudgelled in
Rose Street hard by. Politicians remember the _fasti_ of the Westminster
election, and how Mr. Sheridan, beset by bailiffs on the hustings,
escaped through the churchyard. Artists know that Inigo Jones built that
same church of St. Paul, in compliance with the mandate of his patron,
the Earl of Bedford. “Build me a barn,” said the Earl. Quoth Inigo, “My
lord, I will build you the handsomest barn in England;” and the church is
in the market to this day, with its barn-like roof, to see. Old stagers
who have led jovial London lives, have yet chuckling memories of how in
Covent Garden they were wont to hear the chimes at midnight in the days
when they were eating their terms, and lay over against the “Windmill”
in Moorfields, and consorted with the Bona Robas. Those days, Sir John
Falstaff—those days, Justice Shallow, shall return no more to you. There
was the “Finish,”—a vulgar, noisy place enough; but stamped with undying
gentility by the patronage of his late Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales. Great George “finished” in Covent Garden purlieus; Major Hanger
told his stories, Captain Morris sang his songs, there. In a peaceable
gutter in front of the “Finish,” Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Esq., M.P.,
lay down overtaken in foreign wines, and told the guardian of the night
that his name was Wilberforce. A wild place, that “Finish;” yet a better
one than Great George’s other “Finish” at Windsor, with the actress to
read plays to him, the servants anxious for him to quit the stage, that
they might sell his frogged, furred coats, and white kid pantaloons:
the sorry end in a mean chair—unfriended, unloved, save by hirelings
deserted. When the Hope of England is old enough to wear on his fair
head the coronal and the three ostrich feathers, will _he_ patronise a
“Finish?” shall we have another wild young Prince and Poins, I wonder.
To be sure, Mr. Thackeray tells us that the young nobles of the present
age have “Spratts” and the “back kitchen” to finish up a night in; but,
pshaw! the Hope of England takes the chair at the Royal Institution to
hear Mr. Faraday lecture, and sits on the bench beside John Lord Campbell
to see rogues tried.

Covent Garden is a very chain, and its links are pleasant reminiscences.
They are somewhat dangerous to me, for my business is not antiquarian,
nor even topographical, just now; and I have but to do with the sixth
hour of the morning, and the vegetable market that is held in the monks’
old garden. I will dismiss the noble house of Bedford, though Covent
Garden, &c., are the richest appanage of that ducal entity—simply
recording a wish that you or I, my friend, had one tithe of the fat
revenues that ooze from between the bricks of the Bedford estate. You
should not dig, nor I delve, then. We would drink brown ale, and pay the
reckoning on the nail, and no man for debt should go to jail, that we
could help, from Garryowen to glory. I will say nothing to you of the
old theatre: how it was burnt again and again, and always re-appeared,
with great success on the part of Phœnix. Of Bow Street, even, will
I be silent, and proffer nought of Sir Richard Birnie, or that famed
runner, Townsend. Nor of the Garrick Club, in King Street, will I
discourse; indeed, I don’t know that I am qualified to say anything
pertinent respecting that establishment. I am not a member of the club;
and I am afraid of the men in plush, who, albeit aristocratic, have
yet a certain “Garrick” look about them, and must be, I surmise, the
prosperous brothers of the “green-coats” who sweep and water the stage,
and pick up Sir Anthony Absolute’s hat and crutch in the play. And
scant dissertations shall you have from me on those dim days of old,
when Covent Garden was in verity the garden of a convent; when matins
and vespers, complins and benedictions, were tinkled out in mellow
tintinnabulations through the leafy aisles of fruit trees; when my Lord
Abbot trod the green sward, stately, his signet-ring flashing in the
evening sun; and Brother Austin hated Friar Lawrence, and cursed him
softly as he paced the gravel walks demurely, his hands in his brown
sleeves, his eyes ever and anon cast up to count the peaches on the
wall. Solemn old conventual days, with shrill-voiced choir-boys singing
from breves and minims as big as latch-keys, scored in black and red on
brave parchment music-tomes. Lazy old conventual days, when the cellarer
brewed October that would give Messrs. Bass and Allsopp vertigo; when the
poor were fed with a manchet and stoup at the gate, without seeking the
relieving officer, or an order for the stoneyard. Comfortable old days,
when the Abbot’s _venator_ brought in a fat buck from Sheen or Chertsey,
the _piscator_ fresh salmon (the water-drops looked like pearls on their
silvery backs). Comfortable old days of softly-saddled palfreys, venison
pasties, and Malvoisie, sandalled feet, and shaven crowns, bead-telling,
and censor-swinging. These were the days of the lazy monks in their
Covent Garden. Lazy! They were lazy enough to illuminate the exquisitely
beautiful missals and books of hours you may see in the British Museum;
to feed, and tend, and comfort the poor, and heal them when they were
sick; to keep art and learning from decay and death in a dark age; to
build cathedrals, whose smallest buttress shall make your children’s
children, Sir Charles Barry, blush; but they were the lazy monks—so
let us cry havoc upon them. They were shavelings. They didn’t wash
their feet, they aided and abetted Guy Fawkes, Ignatius Loyola, and the
Cardinal Archbishop of ——.

It is six o’clock on a glorious summer’s morning; the lazy monks fade
away like the shadows of the night, and leave me in Covent Garden, and
in high market. Every morning during the summer may be called market
morning; but in the winter the special mornings are Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday. It is a strange sight then in the winter blackness to see
the gas glimmering among huge piles of vegetables hoisted high on carts,
and slowly moving like Birnam Woods coming to a Dunsinane of marketdom.
When the snow is on the ground, or when the rain it raineth, the glare of
lights and black shadows; the rushing figures of men with burdens; the
great heaving masses of baskets that are tumbled from steep heights; the
brilliantly-lighted shops in the grand arcade, where, winter or summer,
glow the oranges and the hot-house fruits and flowers; all these make up
a series of pictures, strange and sometimes almost terrible. There are
yawning cellars, that vomit green stuff; there are tall potato-sacks,
propped up in dark corners, that might contain corpses of murdered men;
there are wondrous masses of light and shade, and dazzling effects of
candlelight, enough to make old Schkalken’s ghost rise, crayon and
sketch-book in hand, and the _eidolon_ of Paul Rembrandt to take lodgings
in the Piazza, over against the market.

[Illustration: COVENT GARDEN MARKET: THE WEST END.]

But six o’clock in the glorious summer time! The London smoke is not out
of bed yet, and indeed Covent Garden market would at all times seem to
possess an exemption from over fumigation. If you consider the fronts
of the houses, and the arches of the Piazza, you will see that though
tinted by age, they have not that sooty grimness that degrades St. Paul’s
cathedral into the similitude of a temple dedicated to the worship of
the goddess of chimney-sweepers, and makes the East India House (what
will they do with the India House when the directors are demolished?)
look like the outside of the black-hole at Calcutta. Smoke has been
merciful to Covent Garden market, and its cornucopia is not as dingy as
a ramoneur’s sack. All night long the heavily-laden wagons—mountains
of cabbages, cauliflowers, brocoli, asparagus, carrots, turnips, and
seakale; Egyptian pyramids of red-huddled baskets full of apples and
pears, hecatombs of cherries, holocausts of strawberry pottles, chair
wicker bosoms crimsoned by sanguinolent spots; and above all, piles,
heaps—Pelions on Ossas, Atlases on Olympuses, Chimborazos on Himalayas,
Mount Aboras on Mont Blancs—of PEAS, have been creaking and rumbling and
heavily wheezing along suburban roads, and through the main streets of
the never-sleeping city. You heard those broad groaning wheels, perturbed
man, as your head tossed uneasily on the pillow, and you thought of the
bill that was to come due on the morrow. You too heard them, pretty
maiden, in the laced night cap, as you bedewed that delicate border
of dentelle with tears, coursing from the eyes which should have been
closed in sleep two hours since, tears evoked by the atrocious behaviour
of Edward (a monster and member of the Stock Exchange) towards Clara (a
designing, wicked, artful thing, whose papa lives in Torrington Square)
during the last _deux temps_. That dull heavy sound was distinct above
the sharp rattle of the night cabmen’s wheels; the steady revolving
clatter of the home-returning brougham: for the sound of wheels in
London are as the waves of a sea that is never still. The policemen met
the market wagons as they trudged along, and eyed them critically, as
though a neat case of lurking about with intent to commit a felony might
be concealed in a strawberry-pottle, or a drunk and incapable lying
perdu in a pea-basket. Roaring blades, addicted to asserting in chorus
that they would not go home till morning—a needless vaunt, for it was
morning already—hailed the bluff-visaged market carters, interchanged
lively jocularities with them bearing on the syrup giving rhubarb and
the succulent carrot, and lighted their pipes at the blackened calumets
of the vegetarians. Young Tom Buffalo, who had been out at a christening
party at Hammersmith, and had made the welkin ring (whatever and wherever
the welkin may be, and howsoever the process of making it ring be
effected) met a gigantic cabbage-chariot, as home returning, precisely
at that part of Knightsbridge where Old Padlock House used to stand,
and struck a bargain with the charioteer for conveyance to Charing
Cross, for fourpence, a libation of milk, qualified by some spirituous
admixture, and a pipeful of the best Bristol bird’s-eye. And so from all
outlying nursery-grounds and market-gardens about London: from Brompton,
Fulham, Brentford, Chiswick, Turnham Green, and Kew; from sober Hackney,
and Dalston, and Kingsland, bank-clerk beloved; from Tottenham, and
Edmonton, sacred to John Gilpin, his hat and wig; from saintly Clapham
and Brixton, equally interested in piety, sugar-baking, and the funds,
come, too heavy to gallop, too proud to trot, but sternly stalking in
elephantine dignity of progression, the great carts bound to Covent
Garden. One would think that all the vegetable-dishes in the world would
not be able to hold the cabbage, to say nothing of the other verdant
esculents.

Delude not yourself with the notion that the market-carts alone can
bring, or the suburban market-gardens furnish, a sufficient quantity of
green meat for the great, insatiable, hungry, ravenous monster that men
call (and none know why) London. Stand here with me in Covent Garden
market-place, and let your eyes follow whither my finger points. Do you
see those great vans, long, heavily-built, hoisted on high springs, and
with immense wheels—vans drawn by horses of tremendous size and strength,
but which, for all their bulk and weight, seem to move at a lightning
pace compared with the snail crawl of the ancient market-carts? Their
drivers are robust men, fresh-coloured, full-whiskered, strong-limbed,
clad in corduroy shining at the seams, with bulging pockets, from
which peep blotting-paper, interleaved books of invoices, and parcels
receipts. They are always wiping their hot foreheads with red cotton
pocket-handkerchiefs. They are always in such a hurry. They never
can wait. Alert in movement, strong in action, hardy in speech, curt
and quick in reply, setting not much store by policemen, and bidding
the wealthiest potatoe salesman “look sharp;” these vigorous mortals
discharge from their vans such a shower of vegetable missiles that you
might almost fancy the bombardment of a new Sebastopol. “Troy,” the old
ballad tells us, “had a breed of stout bold men;” but these seem stouter
and bolder. And they drive away, these stalwart, bold-spoken varlets,
standing erect in their huge vans, and adjuring, by the name of “slow
coach,” seemingly immoveable market-carts to “mind their eye;” wearing
out the London macadam with their fierce wheels, to the despair of the
commissioners of paving (though my private opinion is, that the paving
commissioners like to see the paving worn out, in order that they may
have the “street up” again); threading their way in a surprisingly
dexterous though apparently reckless manner through the maze of vehicles,
and finding themselves, in an astonishingly short space of time, in
Tottenham Court Road, and Union Street, Borough. What gives these men
their almost superhuman velocity, strength, confidence? They do but carry
cabbages, like other market-folk; but look on the legends inscribed on
these vans, and the mystery is at once explained. “Chaplin and Home,”
“Pickford and Co.,” railway carriers. These vegetable Titans are of
the rail, and raily. They have brought their horns of plenty from the
termini of the great iron roads. Carts and carts, trucks and trucks
have journeyed through the dense night, laden with vegetable produce;
locomotives have shrieked over Chatmoss, dragging cabbages and carrots
after them; the most distant counties have poured the fatness of their
lands at the feet of the Queen-city; but she, like the daughter of the
horse-leech, still cryeth, “Give! give!” and, like Oliver Twist, “asks
for more.” So they send her more, even from strange countries beyond the
sea. Black steamers from Rotterdam and Antwerp belch forth volumes of
smoke at the Tower stairs, and discharge cargoes of peas and potatoes.
The Queen-city is an hungered, and must be fed; and it is no joke, I need
scarcely tell you, to feed London. When the King of Siam has resolved
upon the ruin of a courtier, he makes him a present of a white elephant.
As the animal is thrice sacred in Siamese eyes, the luckless baillee,
or garnishee, or possessor of the brute, dare neither sell, kill, nor
neglect it; and the daily ration of rice, hay, and sugar which the albino
monster devours, soon reduces the courtier to irremediable bankruptcy.
Moral: avoid courts. If this were a despotic country, and her Majesty
the Empress of Britain should take it into her head to ruin Baron
Rothschild or the Marquis of Westminster (and indeed I have heard that
the impoverished nobleman last mentioned is haunted by the fear of dying
in a workhouse), I don’t think she could more easily effect her purpose
than by giving him LONDON and bidding him feed it for a week.

[Illustration: COVENT GARDEN MARKET: EARLY BREAKFAST STALL.]

Very sweet is the smell of the green peas this summer morning; and very
picturesque is it to see the market-women ranged in circles, and busily
employed in shelling those delicious edibles. Some fastidious persons
might perhaps object that the fingers of the shellers are somewhat
coarse, and that the vessels into which the peas fall are rudely
fashioned. What does it matter? If we took this fastidiousness with us
into an analysis of all the things we eat and drink, we should soon fill
up the measure of the title of Dr. Culverwell’s book, by “avoiding”
eating and drinking altogether. The delicate Havannah cigar has been
rolled between the hot palms of oleaginous niggers; nay, some travellers
declare, upon the bare thighs of sable wenches. The snowy lump-sugar has
been refined by means of unutterable nastinesses of a sanguineous nature;
the very daily bread we eat has, in a state of dough, formed the flooring
for a vigorous polka, performed by journeymen bakers with bare feet.
Food is a gift from heaven’s free bounty: take Sancho Panza’s advice,
and don’t look the gift-horse in the mouth. He may have false teeth.
We ought to be very much obliged, of course, to those disinterested
medical gentlemen who formed themselves into a sanitary commission, and
analysing our dinners under a microscope, found that one-half was poison,
and the other half rubbish; but, for my part, I like anchovies to be
red and pickles green, and I think that coffee without chicory in it
is exceedingly nasty. As for the peas, I have so fond a love for those
delicious pulse that I could partake of them even if I knew they had been
shelled by Miss Julia Pastrana. I could eat the shucks; I have eaten them
indeed in Russia, where they stew pea-shells in a sweet sauce, and make
them amazingly relishing.

But sweeter even than the smell of the peas, and more delightful than the
odour of the strawberries, is the delicious perfume of the innumerable
flowers which crowd the north-western angle of the market, from the
corner of King Street to the entrance of the grand avenue. These are
not hot-house plants, not rare exotics; such do not arrive so soon, and
their aristocratic purchasers will not be out of bed for hours. These are
simply hundreds upon hundreds of flower-pots, blooming with roses and
geraniums, with pinks and lilacs, with heartsease and fuschias. There are
long boxes full of mignionette and jessamine; there are little pet vases
full of peculiar roses with strange names; there are rose-trees, roots
and all, reft from the earth by some floral Milo who cared not for the
rebound. The cut flowers, too, in every variety of dazzling hue, in every
gradation of sweet odour, are here, jewelling wooden boards, and making
humble wicker-baskets iridescent. The violets have whole rows of baskets
to themselves. Who is it that calls the violet humble, modest? He (I will
call him he) is nothing of the sort. He is as bold as brass. He comes
the earliest and goes away the latest of all his lovely companions; like
a guest who is determined to make the most of a banquet. When the last
rose of summer, tired of blooming alone, takes his hat and skulks home,
the modest violet, who has been under the table for a great part of the
evening, wakes up, and calls for another bottle of dew—and the right sort.

It seems early for so many persons to be abroad, not only to sell but
to purchase flowers, yet there is no lack of buyers for the perfumed
stores which meet the eye, and well nigh impede the footsteps. Young
sempstresses and milliner’s girls, barmaids and shopwomen, pent up all
day in a hot and close atmosphere, have risen an hour or two earlier, and
make a party of pleasure to come to Covent Garden market to buy flowers.
It is one of heaven’s mercies that the very poorest manage somehow to buy
these treasures; and he who is steeped to the lips in misery will have a
morsel of mignionette in his window, or a bunch of violets in a cracked
jug on his mantelshelf, even as the great lady has rich, savage, blooming
plants in her conservatory, and camelias and magnolias in porphyry
vases on marble slabs. It is a thin, a very thin, line that divides the
independent poor from the pauper in his hideous whitewashed union ward:
the power of buying flowers and of keeping a dog. How the halfpence are
scraped together to procure the violets or mignionette, whence comes
the coin that purchases the scrap of paunch, it puzzles me to say: but
go where you will among the _pauperum tabernas_ and you will find the
dog and the flowers. Crowds more of purchasers are there yet around the
violet baskets; but these are buyers to sell again. Wretched-looking
little buyers are they, half-starved Bedouin children, mostly Irish, in
faded and tattered garments, with ragged hair and bare feet. They have
tramped miles with their scanty stock-money laid up in a corner of their
patched shawls, daring not to think of breakfast till their purchases
be made; and then they will tramp miles again through the cruel streets
of London town, penetrating into courts and alleys where the sun never
shines, peering into doorways, selling their wares to creatures almost
as ragged and forlorn as themselves. They cry violets! They cried
violets in good Master Herrick’s time. There are some worthy gentlemen,
householders and ratepayers, who would put all such street-cries down by
Act of Parliament. Indeed, it must an intolerable sin, this piping little
voice of an eight-years old child, wheezing out a supplication to buy a
ha’porth of violets. But then mouthy gentlemen are all Sir Oracles; and
where they are, no dogs must bark nor violets be cried.

It is past six o’clock, and high ’Change in the market. What gabbling!
what shouting! what rushing and pushing! what confusion of tongues
and men and horses and carts! The roadway of the adjacent streets is
littered with fragments of vegetables. You need pick your way with care
and circumspection through the crowd, for it is by no means pleasant
to be tripped up by a porter staggering under a load of baskets, that
look like a Leaning Tower of Pisa. Bow Street is blocked up by a triple
line of costermongers’ “shallows,” drawn by woe-begone donkies; their
masters are in the market purchasing that “sparrergrass” which they
will so sonorously cry throughout the suburbs in the afternoon. They
are also, I believe, to be put down by the worthy gentlemen who do not
like noise. I wish they could put down, while they are about it, the
chaffering of the money-changers in the temple, and the noise of the
Pharisees’ brushes as they whiten those sepulchres of theirs, and the
clanging of the bells that summon men to thank Heaven that they are not
“as that publican,” and to burn their neighbour because he objects to
shovel hats. King Street, Southampton Street, Russell Street, are full of
carts and men. Early coffee-shops and taverns are gorged with customers,
for the Covent Gardeners are essentially jolly gardeners, and besides,
being stalwart men, are naturally hungry and athirst after their nights’
labour. There are public-houses in the market itself, where they give you
hot shoulder of mutton for breakfast at seven o’clock in the morning! Hot
coffee and gigantic piles of bread-and-butter disappear with astounding
rapidity. Foaming tankards are quaffed, “nips” of alcohol “to keep the
cold out” (though it is May) are tossed off; and among the hale, hearty,
fresh-coloured market-people, you may see, here and there, some tardy
lingerer at “the halls of dazzling light,” who has just crawled away from
the enchanted scene, and, cooling his fevered throat with soda-water, or
whipping up his jaded nerves with brandy and milk, fancies, because he is
abroad at six o’clock in the morning, that he is “seeing life.” Crouching
and lurking about, too, for anything they can beg, or anything they can
borrow, or, I am afraid, for anything they can steal, are some homeless,
shirtless vagabonds, who have slept all night under baskets or tarpaulins
in the market, and now prowl in and out of the coffee-shops and taverns,
with red eyes and unshaven chins. I grieve to have to notice such
unsightly blots upon the Arcadia I have endeavoured to depict; but, alas!
these things ARE! You have seen a caterpillar crawling on the fairest
rose; and this glorious summer sun must have spots on its face. There are
worse on London’s brow at six o’clock in the morning.




SEVEN O’CLOCK A.M.—A PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN.


I know that the part which I have proposed to myself in these papers is
that of a chronological Asmodeus; you, reader, I have enlisted, _nolens
volens_, to accompany me in my flights about town, at all hours of the
day and night; and you must, perforce, hold on by the skirts of my cloak
as I wing my way from quarter to quarter of the immense city, to which
the Madrid which the lame fiend showed his friend was but a nut-shell.
And yet, when I look my self-appointed task in the face, I am astounded,
humiliated, almost disheartened, by its magnitude. How can I hope to
complete it within the compass of this book, within the time allotted
for daily literary labour? For work ever so hard as we penmen may, and
rob ever so many hours from sleep as you may choose to compute—as we are
forced to do sometimes—that you may have your pabulum of printed matter,
more or less amusing and instructive, at breakfast time, or at afternoon
club reading hour, we must yet eat, and drink, and sleep, and go into
the world soliciting bread or favours, we must quarrel with our wives,
if married, and look out the things for the wash, if single—all of which
are operations requiring a certain expenditure of time. We must, we
authors, even have time, an’t please you, to grow ambitious, and to save
money, stand for the borough, attend the board-room, and be appointed
consuls-general to the Baratarian Islands. The old Grub Street tradition
of the author is defunct. The man of letters is no longer supposed to
write moral essays from Mount Scoundrel in the Fleet, to dine at twopenny
ordinaries, and pass his leisure hours in night-cellars. Translators
of Herodotus no longer lie three in a bed; nor is the gentleman who is
correcting the proof-sheets of the Sanscrit dictionary to be found in a
hay-loft over a tripe shop in Little Britain, or to be heard of at the
bar of the Green Dragon. Another, and as erroneous, an idea of the author
has sprung up in the minds of burgesses. He wears, according to some
wiseacres, a shawl dressing-gown, and lies all day on a sofa, puffing a
perfumed _narghilè_, penning paragraphs in violet ink on cream-laid paper
at intervals; or he is a lettered Intriguer, who merely courts the Muses
as the shortest way to the Treasury bench, and writes May Fair novels or
Della Cruscan tragedies that he may the sooner become Prime Minister.
There is another literary idea that may with greater reason become
prevalent—that of the author-manufacturer, who produces such an amount of
merchandise, takes it into the market, and sells it according to demand
and the latest quotations, and the smoke of whose short cutty pipe, as
he spins his literary yarn, is as natural a consequence of manufacture
as the black cloud which gusts from Mr. Billyroller’s hundred-feet-high
brick chimney as he spins _his_ yarns for madapolams and “domestics.” The
author-manufacturer has to keep his books, to pay his men, to watch the
course of the market, and to suit his wares to the prevailing caprice.
And, like the cotton-spinner, he sometimes goes into the “Gazette,”
paying but an infinitesimal dividend in the pound.

Did I not struggle midway into a phrase, some page or so since, and did
it not waltz away from me on the nimble feet of a parenthesis? I fear
that such was the case. How can I hope, I reiterate, to give you anything
like a complete picture of the doings in London while still the clock
goes round? I might take one house and unroof it, one street and unpave
it, one man and disclose to you the secrets of twenty-four hours of his
daily and nightly life; but it is London, in its entirety, that I have
presumed to “time”—forgetting, oh! egregious and inconsistent!—that every
minute over which the clock hand passes is as the shake of the wrist
applied to a kaleidoscope, and that the whole aspect of the city changes
with as magical rapidity.

I should be Briareus multiplied by ten thousand, and not Asmodeus at all,
if I could set down in writing a tithe of London’s sayings and doings,
acts and deeds, seemings and aspects, at seven o’clock in the morning.
Only consider. Drumming with your finger on a map of the metropolis;
just measure a few palms’ lengths, say from Camberwell Gate to the
“Mother Redcap,” on the one hand—from Limehouse Church to Kensington
Gravel Pits, on the other. Take the cubic dimensions, my dear sir; think
of the mean area; rub up those mathematics, for proficiency in whose
more recondite branches you so narrowly escaped being second wrangler,
twenty years since; out with your logarithms, your conic sections, your
fluxions, and calculate the thousands upon thousands of little dramas
that must be taking place in London as the clock strikes seven. Let me
glance at a few, as I travel with you towards that railway terminus
which is our destination. Camberwell Gate: tollbar-keeper, who has been
up all night, going to bed, very cross; tollbar-keeper’s wife gets up
to mind the gate, also very cross. Woodendesk Grove, Grosvenor Park,
Camberwell: Mr. Dockett, wharfage clerk in Messrs. Charter Party and
Co.’s shipping house, Lower Thames Street, is shaving. He breakfasts at
half-past seven, and has to be in the city by nine. Precisely at the
same time that he is passing Mr. Mappin’s razor over his commercial
countenance, Mr. Flybynight, aged twenty-two, also a clerk, but attached
to the Lost-Monkey-and-Mislaid-Poodle-Department (Inland Revenue),
Somerset House, lets himself into No. 7, Woodendesk Grove, next door to
Mr. Dockett’s, by means of a Chubb’s key. Mr. Flybynight is in evening
costume, considerably the worst for the concussion of pale ale bottle
corks. On his elegant tie are the stains of the dressing of some lobster
salad, and about half-a-pint of the crimson stream of life, formerly
the joint property of Mr. Flybynight’s nose and of a cabman’s upper
lip, both injured during a “knock-down and drag-out” fight, supervening
on the disputed question of the right of a passenger to carry a live
turkey (purchased in Leadenhall market) with him in a hackney cab. Mr.
Flybynight has been to two evening parties, a public ball (admission
sixpence), where he created a great sensation among the ladies and
gentlemen present, by appearing with a lady’s cap on his head, a raw
shoulder of mutton in one hand, and a pound of rushlights in the other;
and to two suppers—one of roasted potatoes in Whitechapel High Street,
the second of scolloped oysters in the Haymarket. He paid a visit to
the Vine Street station-house, too, to clear up a misunderstanding as
to a bell which was rung by accident, and a policeman’s hat which was
knocked off by mistake. The inspector on duty was so charmed with Mr.
Flybynight’s engaging demeanour and affable manners, that it was with
difficulty that he was dissuaded from keeping him by him all night, and
assigning him as a sleeping apartment a private parlour with a very
strong lock, and remarkably well ventilated. He only consented to tear
himself away from Mr. Flybynight’s society on the undertaking that
the latter would convey home his friend Mr. Keepitup, who, though he
persistently repeated to all comers that he was “all right,” appeared,
if unsteadiness of gait and thickness of utterance were to be accepted
as evidence, to be altogether wrong. Mr. Flybynight, faithful to his
promise, took Mr. Keepitup (who was in the Customs) home; at least
he took him as far as he would go—his own doorstep, namely, on which
somewhat frigid pedestal he sat, informing the “milk,” a passing
dustman, and a lady in pink, who had lost her way, and seemed to think
that the best way to find it was to consult the pavement by falling
prone thereupon every dozen yards or so—that though circumstances had
compelled him to serve his country in a civil capacity, he was at heart
and by predilection a soldier. In proof of which Mr. Keepitup struck
his breast, volunteered a choice of martial airs, beginning with the
“Death of Nelson,” and ending with a long howl, intermingled with
passionate tears and ejaculations bearing reference to the infidelity
of a certain Caroline, surname unknown, through whose cruelty he
“would never be the same man again.” Mr. Flybynight, safely arrived
at Woodendesk Grove, after these varied peripatetics, is due at the
Lost-Monkey-and-Mislaid-Poodle Office at ten; but he will have a violent
attack of lumbago this morning, which will unavoidably prevent him
from reaching Somerset House before noon. His name will show somewhat
unfavourably in the official book, and the Commissioners will look him
up sharply, and shortly too, if he doesn’t take care. Mr. Keepitup,
who, however eccentric may have been his previous nocturnal vagaries,
possesses the faculty of appearing at the Custom-house gates as the
clock strikes the half-hour after nine, with a very large and stiff
shirt-collar, a microscopically shaven face, and the most irreproachable
shirt, will go to work at his desk in the Long Room, with a steady hand
and the countenance of a candidate for the Wesleyan ministry; but Mr.
Flybynight will require a good deal of soda-water and sal-volatile, and
perhaps a little tincture of opium, before he is equal to the resumption
of his arduous duties. Wild lads, these clerks; and yet they don’t do
such a vast amount of harm, Flybynight and Keepitup! They are very young;
they don’t beat the town every night; they are honest lads at bottom,
and have a contempt for meanness and are not lost to shame. They have
not grown so vicious as to be ashamed and remorseful without any good
resulting therefrom; and you will be astonished five years hence to see
Keepitup high up in the Customs, and Flybynight married to a pretty
girl, to whom he is the most exemplary of husbands. Let me edge in this
little morsel of morality at seven o’clock in the morning. I know the
virtue of steadiness, lectures, tracts, latch-key-prohibitions, strict
parents, young men’s Christian associations, serious tea-parties and
electrifying machines; but I have seen the world in my time, and its
ways. Youth _will_ be youth, and youthful blood _will_ run riot. There is
no morality so false as that which ignores the existence of immorality.
Let us keep on preaching to the prodigals, and point with grim menace
to the draff and husks, and the fatted calf which never shall be theirs
if they do not reform; let us thunder against their dissipation, their
late hours, their vain “larks,” their unseemly “sprees.” It is our duty;
youth must be reproved, admonished, restrained by its elders. It has
been so ever since the world began; but do not let us in our own hearts
think every wild young man is bound hopelessly to perdition. Some there
are, indeed, (and they are in evil case,) who have come to irremediable
grief, and must sit aloof—spirits fallen never to rise again—and watch
the struggling souls. But it must rejoice even those callous ones to see
how many pecks of wild oats are sown every day, and what goodly harvests
of home virtues and domestic joys are reaped on all sides, from the most
unpromising soil. Let us not despair of the tendencies of the age. Young
men will be young men, but they should be taught and led with gentle and
wise counsels, with forbearance and moderation, to abandon the follies of
youth, and to become staid and decorous. Flybynight, with such counsels,
and good examples from his elders—ah, ye seniors! what examples are not
due from you!—will leave off sack and live cleanly like a gentleman; and
Keepitup will not bring his parents’ gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

Seven o’clock in the morning! I have already ventured a passing
allusion to the “milk.” The poor little children who sell violets and
water-cresses debouch from the great thoroughfares, and ply their humble
trade in by-streets full of private houses. The newsvenders’ shops in
the Strand, Holywell Street, and Fleet Street, are all in full activity.
Legions of assistants crowd behind the broad counters, folding the still
damp sheets of the morning newspapers, and, with fingers moving in swift
legerdemain, tell off “quires” and “dozens” of cheap periodicals. If it
happen to be seven o’clock, and a Friday morning, not only the doors of
the great newsvenders—such as Messrs. Smith and Son and Mr. Vickers—but
the portals of all the newspaper offices, will be crowded with newsmen’s
carts and newsmen’s trucks; and from the gaping gates themselves will
issue hordes of newsmen and flying cohorts of newsboys—boys with
parcels, boys with bags, boys with satchels, men staggering under the
weight of great piles of printed paper. Mercy on us! what a plethora of
brainwork is about, and what a poor criterion of its quality the quantity
manifestly affords! Yon tiny urchin with the red comforter has but
half-a-dozen copies tucked beneath his arm of a journal sparkling with
wit, and radiant in learning, and scathing in its satire, and Titanic in
its vigour; yet, treading on his heels, comes a colossus in corduroy,
eclipsed by a quadrangular mountain of closely-packed paper, quires—nay,
whole reams—of some ragamuffin print, full of details of the last murder
and abuse of some wise and good statesman because he happens to be a lord.

Seven, still seven! Potboys, rubbing their eyes, take down the shutters
of taverns in leading thoroughfares, and then fall to rubbing the
pewter pots till they assume a transcendent sheen. Within, the young
ladies who officiate in the bar, and who look very drowsy in their
curl-papers and cotton-print dresses, are rubbing the pewter counters
and the brass-work of the beer-engines, the funnels and the whisky
noggins, washing the glasses, polishing up the mahogany, cutting up
the pork pies which Mr. Watling’s man has just left, displaying the
Banbury cakes and Epping sausages under crystal canopies. The early
customers—matutinal _habitués_—drop in for small measures of cordials or
glasses of peculiarly mild ale; and the freshest news of last night’s
fire in Holborn, or last night’s division in the House, or last night’s
opera at Her Majesty’s, are fished up from the columns of the “Morning
Advertiser.” By intercommunication with the early customers, who all
have a paternal and respectful fondness for her, the barmaid becomes
_au courant_ with the news of the day. As a rule, the barmaid does not
read the newspaper. On the second day of publication, she lends it to
the dissenting washerwoman or the radical tailor in the court round the
corner, who send small children, whose heads scarcely reach to the top
of the counter, for it. When it is returned, she cuts it up for tobacco
screws and for curl papers. I like the barmaid, for she is often pretty,
always civil, works about fourteen hours a day for her keep and from
eighteen to twenty pounds a year, is frequently a kinless orphan out of
that admirable Licensed Victuallers’ School, and is, in nine cases out of
ten, as chaste as Diana.

I should be grossly misleading you, were I to attempt to inculcate
the supposition that at seven o’clock in the morning only the humbler
classes, or those who have stopped up all night, are again up and
doing. The Prime Minister is dressed, and poring over a savage leader
in the “Times,” denouncing his policy, sneering at his latest measure,
and insulting him personally in a facetious manner. The noble officers
told off for duty of her Majesty’s regiment of Guards are up and fully
equipped, though perchance they have spent the small hours in amusements
not wholly dissimilar from those employed by the daring Flybynight
and the intrepid Keepitup to kill time, and have devoted their vast
energies to the absorbing requirements of morning parade. Many of the
infant and juvenile scions of the aristocracy have left their downy
couches ere this, and are undergoing a lavatory purgatory in the
nursery. Many meek-faced, plainly-dressed young ladies, of native and
foreign extraction, attached as governesses to the aristocratic families
in question, are already in the school-room, sorting their pupils’
copy-books, or preparing for the early repetition of the music lesson,
which is drummed and thrummed over in the morning pending the arrival
of Signor Papadaggi or Herr Hammerer, who comes for an hour and earns a
guinea. The governess, Miss Grissel, does not work more than twelve hours
a day, and she earns perhaps fifty guineas a year against Papadaggi’s
fifteen hundred and Hammerer’s two thousand. But then she is only a
governess. Her life is somewhat hard, and lonely, and miserable, and
might afford, to an ill-regulated mind, some cause for grumbling; but it
is her duty to be patient, and not to repine. What says the pleasing poet?

    “O! let us love our occupations,
    Bless the squire and his relations,
    Live upon our daily rations,
    And always know our proper stations.”[2]

Let us trust Miss Grissel knows her proper station, and is satisfied.

Seven o’clock in the morning; but there are more governesses, and
governesses out of bed, than Miss Grissel and her companions in woe,
in the mansions of the nobility. Doctor Wackerbarth’s young gentlemen,
from Towellem House, New Road, are gone to bathe at Peerless Pool, under
escort of the writing-master. The Misses Gimps’ establishment for young
ladies, at Bayswater, is already in full activity; and the eight and
thirty boarders (among whom there are at present, and have been for
the last ten years, two, and positively only two, vacancies. N.B.—The
daughters of gentlemen only are received)—the eight and thirty boarders,
in curl papers and brown Holland pinafores, are floundering through
sloughs of despond in the endeavour to convey, in the English language,
the fact that Calypso was unable to console herself for the departure of
Ulysses; and into the French vernacular, the information that, in order
to be disabused respecting the phantoms of hope and the whisperings of
fancy, it is desirable to listen to the history of Rasselas, Prince of
Abyssinia. In Charterhouse and Merchant Taylors’ and St. Paul’s, the
boys are already at their lessons, and the cruel anger of Juno towards
Æneas, together with the shameful conduct of Clytemnestra to Agamemnon,
are matters of public (though unwilling) discussion; some private
conversations going on surreptitiously, meanwhile, touching the price of
alleytaws as compared with agates, and the relative merits of almond-rock
and candied horehound. After all, the poor have their privileges—their
immunities; and the couch of the rich is not altogether a bed of roses.
Polly Rabbets, the charity girl, lies snugly in bed, while the honourable
Clementina St. Maur is standing in the stocks, or is having her knuckles
rapped for speaking English instead of French. Polly has a run in the
Dials before breakfast, an expedition to buy a red herring for father,
and perchance a penny for disbursement at the apple-stall. She is not
wanted at school till nine. The most noble the Marquis of Millefleurs,
aged ten, at Eton, has to rise at six; he is fag to Tom Tucker, the army
clothier’s son. He has to clean his master’s boots, fry bacon, and toast
bread for his breakfast. If he doesn’t know his lesson in school, the
most noble the Marquis of Millefleurs is liable to be birched; but no
such danger menaces Jemmy Allbones at the National, or Tommy Grimes at
the Ragged School. If the schoolmaster were to beat them, their parents
would have the _plagosus Orbilius_ up at the police-court in a trice, and
the Sunday newspapers would be full of details of the “atrocious cruelty
of a schoolmaster.”

One more peep at seven o’clock doings, and we will move further afield.
Though sundry are up and doing, the great mass of London is yet sleeping.
Sleeps the cosy tradesman, sleeps the linendraper’s shopman (till eight),
sleeps the merchant, the dandy, the actor, the author, the _petite
maitresse_. Hold fast while I wheel in my flight and hover over Pimlico.
There is Millbank, where the boarders and lodgers, clad in hodden gray,
with masks on their faces and numbers on their backs, have been up and
stirring since six. And there, north-west of Millbank, is the palace,
almost as ugly as the prison, where dwells the Great Governess of the
Land. She is there, for you may see the standard floating in the morning
breeze; and at seven in the morning, she, too, is up and doing. If she
were at Osborne she would be strolling very likely on the white-beached
shore, listening to the sea murmuring “your gracious Majesty,” and “your
Majesty’s ever faithful subject and servant,” and “your petitioner
will ever pray;” for it is thus doubtless that the obsequious sea has
addressed sovereigns since Xerxes’ time. Or if the Imperial Governess
were at Windsor, she might, at this very time, be walking on those
mysterious Slopes on which it is a standing marvel that Royalty can
preserve its equilibrium. When I speak of our gracious lady being awake
and up at seven o’clock, I know that I am venturing into the realms of
pure supposition; but remember I am Asmodeus, and can unroof palaces
and hovels at will. Is it not, besides, a matter of public report that
the Queen rises early? Does not the Court newsman (I wonder whether
that occult functionary gets up early too) know it? Does not everybody
know it—everybody say it? And what everybody says must be true. There
are despatches to be read; private and confidential letters to foreign
sovereigns to be written; the breakfasts, perchance, of the little
princes and princesses to be superintended; the proofs, probably, of the
last Royal etching or princely photograph to be inspected; a new pony
to be tried in the riding-house; a new dog to be taught tricks: a host
of things to do. Who shall say? What do we know about the daily life
of royalty, save that it must be infinitely more laborious than that
of a convict drudging through his penal servitude in Portland Prison?
I met the carriage of H.R.H. the Prince Consort, with H.R.H. inside
it, prowling about Pedlar’s Acre very early the other morning, going
to or coming from, I presume, the South-Western Railway Terminus. When
I read of her Majesty’s “arriving with her accustomed punctuality” at
some rendezvous at nine o’clock in the morning, I can but think of and
marvel at the amount of business she must have despatched before she
entered her carriage. If there were to be (which heaven forfend!) a
coronation to-morrow, the sovereign would be sure to arrive with his or
her “accustomed punctuality;” yet how many hours it must take to try on
the crown, to study the proper sweep of the imperial purple, to learn by
heart that coronation oath which is never, never broken! For my part, I
often wonder how kings and queens and emperors find time to go to bed at
all.

So now, reader, not wholly, I trust, unedified by the cursory view we
have taken of Babylon the Great in its seven-o’clock-in-the-morning
phase, we have arrived at the end of our journey—to another stage
thereof, at least. We have flown from Knightsbridge to Bermondsey,
not exactly as the crow flies, nor yet as straight as an arrow from a
Tartar’s bow; but still we have gyrated and skimmed and wheeled along
somehow, even as a sparrow seeking knowledge on the housetops and corn in
the street kennels. And now we will go out of town.

Whithersoever you choose; but by what means of conveyance? By water?
The penny steamboats have not commenced their journeys yet. The _Pride
of the Thames_ is snugly moored at Essex Pier, and _Waterman_, No. 2,
still keeps her head under her wing—or under her funnel, if you will.
The omnibuses have not yet begun to roll in any perceptible numbers,
and the few stage coaches that are still left (how they linger, those
cheerful institutions, bidding yet a blithe defiance to the monopolising
and all-devouring rail!) have not put in an appearance at the White
Horse Cellar in Piccadilly, the Flower Pot in Bishopsgate Street, or the
Catherine Wheel in the Borough. So we must needs quit Babylon by railway.
Toss up for a terminus with me. Shall it be London Bridge, Briarean
station with arms stretching to Brighton the well-beloved, Gravesend
the chalky and periwinkley, Rochester the martial, Chatham the naval,
Hastings the saline, Dover the castellated, Tunbridge Wells the genteel,
Margate the shrimpy, Ramsgate the asinine, Canterbury the ecclesiastical,
or Herne Bay the desolate? Shall it be the Great Northern, hard by
Battle Bridge and Pentonville’s frowning bastille? No; the fens of
Lincolnshire nor the moors of Yorkshire like me not. Shall it be the
Great Western, with its vast, quiet station, its Palladio-Vitruvian
hotel, and its promise of travel through the rich meadows of Berkshire
and by the sparkling waters of Isis, into smiling Somerset and blooming
Devon? No; cab fares to Paddington are ruinously expensive, and I
have prejudices against the broad gauge. Shall it be the Eastern
Counties? Avaunt! evil-smelling Shoreditch, bad neighbourhood of worse
melodramas, and cheap grocers’ shops where there is sand in the sugar and
birch-brooms in the tea. No Eastern Counties carriage shall bear me to
the pestiferous marshes of Essex or the dismal flats of Norfolk. There is
the South-Western. Hum! The Hampton Court line is pleasant; the Staines,
Slough, and Windsor delicious; but I fancy not the Waterloo Road on a
fine morning. I am undecided. Toss up again. Heads for the Great Western;
tails for the London and North-Western. Tails it is; and abandoning our
aërial flight, let us cast ourselves into yonder Hansom, and bid the
driver drive like mad to Euston Square, else we shall miss the seven
o’clock train.

This Hansom is a most dissipated vehicle, and has evidently been up all
night. One of its little silk window-curtains has been torn from its
fastenings and flutters in irregular festoons on the inward wall. The
cushions are powdered with cigar ashes; there is a theatrical pass-check,
and the thumb of a white kid glove, very dirty, lying at the back.
The long-legged horse with his ill-groomed coat, all hairs on end like
the fretful porcupine his quills, and his tail whisking with derisive
defiance in the face of the fare, carries his head on one side, foams at
the mouth, and is evidently a dissipated quadruped, guilty, I am afraid,
of every vice except hypocrisy. Of the last, certainly, he cannot be
accused, for he makes not the slightest secret of his propensity for
kicking, biting, gibbing, rearing, and plunging, a succession of which
gymnastic operations brings us, in an astonishingly brief space of time,
to George Street, Euston Square; where the cabman, who looks like a
livery-stable edition of Don Cæsar de Bazan, with a horse-cloth instead
of a mantle, tosses the coin given him into the air, catches it again,
informs me contemptuously that money will grow warm in my pocket if I
keep it there so long, and suddenly espying the remote possibility of a
fare in the extreme distance of the Hampstead Road, drives off—“tools”
off, as he calls it—as though the Powers of Darkness, with Lucifer and
Damagorgon at their head, were after him.

I think the Euston Square Terminus is, for its purpose, the handsomest
building I have ever seen, and I have seen a few railway stations. There
is nothing to compare to it in Paris, where the termini are garish,
stuccoed, flimsy-looking structures, half booths and half barracks.
Not Brussels, not Berlin, not Vienna, can show so stately a structure,
for a railway station, _bien entendu_; and it is only, perhaps, in St.
Petersburg, which seems to have been built with a direct reference to
the assumption of the Imperial crown at some future period by the King
of Brobdignag, that a building can be found—the Moscow Railway Terminus,
in fact—to equal in grandeur of appearance our columniated palace of the
iron road. But the Russian station, like all else in that “Empire of
Façades,” is deceptive: a magnificent delusion, a vast and splendid sham.
Of seeming marble without it is; within, but bad bricks and lath and
plaster.

[Illustration: PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN: PLATFORM OF THE LONDON AND
NORTH-WESTERN RAILWAY.]

_Open sesame!_ Let us pass the crowds of railway porters, who have not
much to do just now, and are inclined to lounge about with their hands
in their pockets, and to lean—in attitudes reminding the spectator of
the Grecian statues clad in green velveteen, and with white letters on
their collars—on their luggage trucks, for the passengers by the seven
o’clock train are not much addicted to arriving in cabs or carriages
which require to be unloaded, and there are very few shilling or sixpenny
gratuities to be earned by the porters, for the securing of a comfortable
corner seat with your back to the engine, or that inestimable comfort,
a place in a first-class carriage whose door the guard is good enough
to keep locked, and in which you can make yourself quite at home with a
bottle of sherry, some walnuts, and a quiet game at _écarté_ or _vingt
un_. The seven o’clock trainbands are not exactly of the class who drink
sherry and play cards; they are more given to selling walnuts than to
eating them. They are, for the most part, hard-faced, hard-handed,
poorly-clad creatures; men in patched, time-worn garments; women in
pinched bonnets and coarse shawls, carrying a plenitude of baskets and
bundles, but very slightly troubled with trunks or portmanteaus. You
might count a hundred heads and not one hat-box; of two hundred crowding
round the pay-place to purchase their third-class tickets for Manchester,
or Liverpool, or even further north, you would have to look and look
again, and perhaps vainly after all, for the possessor of a railway rug,
or even an extra overcoat. Umbrellas, indeed, are somewhat plentiful;
but they are not the slim, aristocratic trifles with ivory handles and
varnished covers—enchanter’s wands to ward off the spells of St. Swithin,
which moustached dandies daintily insert between the roof and the
hat-straps of first-class carriages. Third-class umbrellas are dubious
in colour, frequently patched, bulgy in the body, broken in the ribs,
and much given to absence from the nozzle. Swarming about the pay-place,
which their parents are anxiously investing, thirteen-and-fourpence or
sixteen-and-ninepence in hand, are crowds of third-class children. I am
constrained to acknowledge that the majority of these juvenile travellers
cannot be called handsome children, well-dressed children, even tolerably
good-looking children. Poor little wan faces you see here, overshadowed
by mis-shapen caps, and bonnets nine bauble square; poor little thin
hands, feebly clutching the scant gowns of their mothers; weazened little
bodies, shrunken little limbs, distorted often by early hardship, by the
penury which pounced on them—not in their cradles—they never had any—but
in the baker’s jacket in which they were wrapped when they were born,
and which will keep by them, their only faithful friend, until they die,
and are buried by the parish—poor ailing little children are these, and
among them who shall tell how many hungry little bellies! Ah! judges
of Amontillado sherry; crushers of walnuts with silver nut-crackers;
connoisseurs who prefer French to Spanish olives, and are curious
about the yellow seal; gay riders in padded chariots; proud cavaliers
of blood-horses, you don’t know how painfully and slowly, almost
agonisingly, the poor have to scrape, and save, and deny themselves the
necessaries of life, to gather together the penny-a-mile fare. It is a
long way to Liverpool, a long way to Manchester; the only passengers by
the seven o’clock train who can afford to treat the distance jauntily,
are the Irish paupers, who are in process of being passed to their
parish, and who will travel free. O! marvels of eleemosynary locomotion
from Euston Square to Ballyragget or Carrighmadhioul!

But hark! the train bell rings; there is a rush, and a trampling of feet,
and in a few seconds the vast hall is almost deserted. This spectacle
has made me somewhat melancholy, and I think, after all, that I will
patronise the nine o’clock express instead of the PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN.

Let us follow the crowd of third-class passengers on to the vast
platform. There the train awaits them, puffing, and snorting, and
champing its adamantine bit, like some great iron horse of Troy suddenly
gifted with life and power of locomotion. By the way, I wonder how that
same wooden horse we are supposed to read about in Homer, but study
far more frequently in the pages of Lemprière, or in the agreeable
metrical romance of Mr. Alexander Pope, really effected its entrance
into Ilium. Was it propelled on castors, on rollers, or on those
humble wooden wheels that quickened the march of the toy horse of our
nonage—the ligneous charger from Mr. Farley’s shop in Fleet Street,
painted bright cream-colour, with spots resembling red wafers stuck all
over him, a perpendicular mane, and a bushy tail? Very few first or even
second-class carriages are attached to the great morning train. The rare
exceptions seem to be placed there more as a graceful concession to the
gentilities, or the respectabilities, or the “gigabilities,” as Mr.
Carlyle would call them, than with any reference to their real utility
in a journey to the north. Who, indeed, among the bustling Anglo-Saxons,
almost breathless in their eagerness to travel the longest possible
distance in the shortest possible time, would care to pay first-class
fare for a trip to Manchester, which consumes ten mortal hours, when,
by the space-scorning express, the distance may be accomplished, at a
not unreasonable augmentation of fare, in something like five hours? So
the roomy six-seated chariots, with their arm-rests and head-rests, are
well nigh abandoned; and the wooden boxes, which appear to have been
specially designed by railway directors to teach second-class travellers,
who can afford to pay more than third-class fare, that they had much
better pay first-class, and go the entire animal (which, indeed, seeing
how abominable are our second-class carriages in England, is a far
preferable proceeding), are not much better tenanted. Some misanthropic
men, in Welsh wigs and fur caps with flaps turned down over the ears,
peer at us as we pass, pull up the window-frames captiously, as though
they suspected us of a design to intrude on their solitude, and, watch in
hand, call out in hoarse voices to the guard to warn him it is time the
train had started. What is the use of being in a hurry, gentlemen? you
will have plenty of breathing-time at Tring, and Watford, and Weedon, and
some five-and-twenty other stations, besides opportunities for observing
the beauties of nature at remote localities, where you will be quietly
shunted off on to a siding to allow the express to pass you by.

But what a contrast to the quietude of the scarcely-patronised first and
second-class _wagons_ are the great hearse-like caravans in which travel
the teeming hundreds who can afford to pay but a penny a mile! Enter
one of these human menageries where the occupants are stowed away with
little more courtesy or regard to their comfort than might be exemplified
by the master of the ceremonies of one of Mr. Wombwell’s vans. What a
hurly-burly; what a seething mass; what a scrambling for places; what a
shrill turmoil of women’s voices and children’s wailings, relieved, as
in the _Gospodin Pomilaïou_ (the Kyrie Eleison of the Russian churches),
by the deep bass voices of gruff men! What a motley assemblage of men,
women, and children, belonging to callings multifariously varied, yet
all marked with the homogeneous penny-a-mile stamp of poverty! Sailors
with bronzed faces and tarry hands, and those marvellous tarpaulin
pancake hats, stuck, in defiance of all the laws of gravity, at the
back of their heads; squat, squarely-built fellows, using strange and
occasionally not very polite language, much given to “skylarking” with
one another, but full of a simple, manly courtesy to all the females,
and marvellously kind to the babies and little children; gaunt American
sailors in red worsted shirts, with case-knives suspended to their belts,
taciturn men expectorating freely, and when they do condescend to address
themselves to speech, using the most astounding combination of adjective
adjurations, relating chiefly to their limbs and their organs of vision;
railway navvies going to work at some place down the line, and obligingly
franked thither for that purpose by the company; pretty servant-maids
going to see their relatives; Jew pedlars; Irish labourers in swarms;
soldiers on furlough, with the breast of their scarlet coatees open, and
disclosing beneath linen of an elaborate coarseness of texture—one might
fancy so many military penitents wearing hair tunics; other soldiers in
full uniform, with their knapsacks laid across their knees, and their
muskets—prudently divested of the transfixing bayonets—which the old
women in the carriage are marvellously afraid will “go off,” disposed
beside them, proceeding to Weedon barracks under the command of a staid
Scotch corporal, who reads a tract, “Grace for Grenadiers” or “Powder and
Piety,” and takes snuff; journeymen mechanics with their tool-baskets;
charwomen, servants out of place, stablemen, bricklayers’ labourers, and
shopboys.

[Illustration: PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN: INTERIOR OF A THIRD CLASS CARRIAGE.]

Ay, and there are, I am afraid, not a few bad characters among the
crowd: certain dubiously-attired, flash-looking, ragged dandies, with
cheap pins in their foul cravats, and long greasy hair floating over
their coat-collars, impress me most unfavourably, and dispose me to
augur ill for the benefit which Manchester or Liverpool may derive from
their visit; and of the moral status of yonder low-browed, bull-necked,
villanous-looking gentleman, who has taken a seat in a remote corner,
between two stern guardians, and who, strive as he may to pull his
coat-cuffs over his wrists, cannot conceal the presence of a pair of neat
shining handcuffs, there cannot, I perpend, exist any reasonable doubt.
But we must take the evil with the good: and we cannot expect perfection,
not even in a Parliamentary Train.




EIGHT O’CLOCK A.M.—ST. JAMES’S PARK—THE MALL.


Of the great army of sightseers, there are few but have paid a visit
to Portsmouth, and, under the guidance of a mahogany-faced man in a
pea-jacket, who has invariably served in his youth as coxswain to
Admiral Lord Nelson, K.C.B., have perambulated from stem to stern, from
quarterdeck to kelson, that famous ship from whose signal halyards flew
out, fifty-three years since, the immortal watchword “England expects
every man to do his duty,” in Trafalgar Bay. We are (or rather were, till
the epoch of the late passport regulations and the war), an ambitious
army of sightseers in this year of questionable grace, ’59; and nothing
less would serve us then for an autumn trip than a picnic in the Street
of Tombs at Pompeii, a moonlight polka among the rank docks and charlocks
and slimy reptiles of the Roman Colosseum, a yacht voyage up the gulf of
Bothnia, or a four days’ jolting in a _telega_ from Moscow to the fair of
Nishni-Novgorod. But in the days of yore, when this old hat was new, and
Manlius was consul, and the eleven hours’ route to the Continent existed
not, we went a-gipsying in a less ostentatious manner. The Lions in the
Tower, the Horns at Highgate, the Spaniards at Hampstead, the Wandering
Minstrel at Beulah Spa; and on highdays and holidays a stage-coach
and pleasure-boat journey to Portsmouth, Southampton, Netley Abbey,
Carisbrook Castle, and the Undercliff; these filled up the simple measure
of our pleasure-gadding. We are improved now-a-days, and go the grand
tour like my lord; and are wiser, and better, and happier—of course.

When in the noble harbour of Portsmouth you have taken your wife, your
sweetheart, or your friend the intelligent foreigner, to whom you wish
to show the glories of England, and when the cicerone of the great
war-ship has told his parrot-tale about admirals’ quarter-galleries and
officers’ gun-rooms; when at last he has taken you into the cabin, and at
the back shown you the sorrowful inscription painted on the stanchion,
“HERE NELSON DIED!” did never a sudden desire come across you to be left
alone—to have the army of sight-seers banished five hundred miles away—to
be allowed to remain there in the silent cabin among the shadows, to muse
on the memory of the great dead, to conjure up mind-pictures of that
closing scene: the cannon booming overhead; the terrified surgeons with
outspread bandages, and probes, and knives, knowing that their skill was
of no avail; the burly shipmen crying like little children; and alone
tranquil and serene among that sorrowful group, peaceful as an infant in
its cradle, the Admiral, his stars and ribbons gleaming in the lantern’s
fitful rays, but never with so strong a light as the gory ghastliness of
his death wound; the brave yellow-haired Admiral, with the puny limbs
and giant’s heart, waiting to die, ready to die, happy to die, thanking
God that he had done his duty to his king, and meekly saying, “Kiss me,
Hardy.”

That inscription in the _Victory’s_ cabin has been to me the source of
meditation frequent and infinitely pleasant. I love to think, walking
in historical streets and houses, that my feet are treading over spots
where men for ever famous have left an imprint of glory. I peer into the
soil, the stones, the planks, to descry the shadowy mark of Hercules’
foot, of the iron-plated sole of the warrior, the sandalled shoon of the
saint, the dainty heel of the brocaded slipper of beauty. Every place
that history or tradition has made her own is to me a field, not of
forty, but of forty thousand footsteps; and I please myself sometimes
with futile wishes that the boundaries of these footsteps might have been
marked by plates of brass and adamant, as Nelson’s death-place is marked
on board his flagship. It were better, perhaps, to leave the exact spot
to imagination; for though I would give something to know the very window
of the Banqueting House from whence Charles Stuart came out to his death,
and the precise spot where he turned to Juxon and uttered his mysterious
injunction “Remember!” I would not care to know the particular branch of
the tree to which Judas affixed his thrice-earned halter when he hanged
himself: I could spare Mr. Dix the trouble of telling me the identical
spot on the tavern table on which the coroner laid his three-cornered
hat when he held his inquest on the worthless impostor Chatterton—a
“marvellous boy” if you will, but one who perished in his miserable folly
and forgery—and I could well exempt the legitimacy-bemused courtiers of
Louis XVIII. from perpetuating, as they did in brass, the few inches of
soil at Calais first pressed on his return to France by the foot of that
gross fat man.

There are two cities in the world, London and Paris, so full of these
footstep memories, so haunted by impalpable ghosts of the traces of
famous deeds, that locomotion, to one of my temperament, becomes a task
very slow, if not painfully difficult, of accomplishment. ’Tis a long
way from the Luxor Obelisk to the Carrousel; but it’s a week’s journey
when you feel inclined to stop at every half-dozen yards’ distance,
questioning yourself and the ministering spirits of your books, pointing
your fingers to the paving-stones, and saying—Here the guillotine stood;
here Louis died; here the daughter of Maria Theresa cast her last glance
at the cupolas of the Tuileries; here Robespierre was hooted; here
Théroigne de Méricourt was scourged; here Napoleon the Great showed
the little king of Rome to the people; here, on the great Carrousel
Place, he, arrayed in the undying gray coat and little hat, reviewed
the veterans of his guard, many and many a time at EIGHT O’CLOCK IN THE
MORNING.

[Illustration: EIGHT O’CLOCK A.M.: ST. JAMES’S PARK.]

There! I have brought you round to the subject-matter of this article,
and to the complexion of “Twice Round the Clock” again; and the stroke
is, I flatter myself, felicitous—rivalling Escobar or Dom Calmet in
Jesuitry, Metternich and Menschikoff in diplomacy. You thought doubtless
that I was about to launch into an interminable digression; you may
perhaps have said, scoffingly, that Admiral Lord Nelson, K.C.B.,
Maximillien Robespierre, Charles the First’s head, and the Emperor
Napoleon’s cocked hat, could have nothing whatsoever to do with the Mall
of Saint James’s Park at eight o’clock in the morning. You are mistaken.
The allusions to memorable footsteps were all cunningly devised with a
reference to the great Field of Famous Footsteps—the Mall, which, were
the imprint of those bygone pedal pressures marked out with landmarks,
such as those in the _Victory’s_ cabin, would become a very Field of
the Cloth of Brass. And what better time can there be to muse upon the
traditional glories of the Mall and the fame of its frequenters, than
eight a.m. in sweet summer time?

I grant the clown, the dunderheaded moneyspinner who votes that books
are “rubbish,” the cobweb-brained fop who languidly declares reading
to be a “bore,” will find in the broad smooth Mall, just a Mall, broad
and smooth, and nought else—even as Peter Bell found in a primrose by
the river’s brim a yellow primrose, and nothing more. At eight o’clock
in the morning, to clown, dunderhead, and cobweb-brain, the Mall is a
short cut from Marylebone to Westminster; the water-carts are laying the
dust; mechanics are going to work; there are some government offices in
the distance; two big guns on queer-looking carriages; some scattered
children; a good many birds, making rather a disagreeable noise, in
the green trees; and a few cows being milked in a corner. But come
with me, dweller in the past, lover of ancient and pleasant memories,
hand-and-glove friend of defunct worthies, shadowy acquaintances in
ruffs and peaked beards and point lace. Let us deliver dunderhead and
cobweb-brain to the tormentors, and, sitting on a rustic bench beneath
a spreading tree, summon the Famous Footsteps; summon the dead-and-gone
walkers to pace the Mall again. Here they come! a brave gathering, a
courtly throng, a worshipful assemblage, but oft-times a motley horde
and a fantastic crew. Here is Henry the Eighth’s Mall, a park where
that disreputable monarch indulged in “the games of hare and pheasant,
partridge and heron, for his disport and pastime,” and where he had a
deer killed for the amusement of the “Embassador from Muscovie.” Here is
Saint James’s Park in the reign of clever, shrewish, cruel Queen Bess—a
park only used as an appendage to the tilt-yard and a nursery for deer:
here is the “inward park” (now the inclosure and ornamental water), into
which, so late as the commencement of Charles II.’s reign, access to the
public was denied; and where, in 1660, Master Pepys saw a man “basted”
by the keeper for carrying some people over on his back through the
water. Here is Charles II.’s famous Mall, for the first time broad and
smooth, the park planted and reformed by the celebrated French gardener,
Le Nôtre, laid out with fish-ponds and a decoy for water-fowl; the Mall
itself a vista of half a mile in length, on which the game of Pall Mall
was played, and which, always according to curious Samuel Pepys, who
“discoursed with the keeper of the Pall Mall as he was sweeping it,” was
floored with mixed earth, and over all that cockle-shells, powdered and
spread to keep it fast; which, however, in dry weather, turned to dust
and deadened the ball. In this park of Charles II. was the fantastic
little territory of Duck Island, the ground contained within the channels
of the decoy, and which London Barataria had revenues and laws and
governors appointed by the king. The Duke of Saint Simon’s friend, Saint
Evremond, was one of these governors; Sir John Flock another. Close to
Duck Island was Rosamond’s Pond, a piece of water whose name bore a dim
analogy to the _soubriquet_ with which, in later years, Waterloo Bridge
has been qualified; for it was in Rosamond’s Pond that forsaken women
came in preference, at even-song, to drown themselves. There was the
Birdcage Walk, where Mr. Edward Storey kept his Majesty’s aviary, and
dwelt in the snug little hut recently demolished, known as Storey’s Gate.
There was the Mulberry Garden, into which the river Tyburn flows, and so
into Tothill Fields and the Thames; and there was Spring Gardens, where
the beaux went to look at the citizens’ wives; and the citizens’ wives, I
hope, to drink chocolate, but I fear to look at the beaux.

But the famous footsteps? See, see in your mind’s eye, Horatio, how the
shadows of the old frequenters of the Mall come trooping along. Here
is the founder of the feast himself, King Charles the Second, witty,
worthless, and good-humoured, tramping along the broad expanse at _eight_
o’clock in the morning, to the despair of his courtiers, who liked not
walking so fast, nor getting up so early. You can’t mistake the king’s
figure; ’tis that swarthy gentleman, with the harshly-marked countenance,
the bushy eyebrows, the lively kindling gray eye, and the black suit and
perriwig. He walks a little in advance of his suite with an easy, rapid
gait, and at his heels follow a little barking multitude of dogs, black,
black and white, or black and tan, with long silky ears and feathery
tails. We may see him again, and on the Mall, but not at eight o’clock
in the morning. It is the afternoon of a July day, and a court cavalcade
comes flaunting in feathers forth from Whitehall. Here is King Charles,
but in a laced and embroidered suit, and mounted on a gaily-caparisoned
charger. He rides with his hand in that of a lady, in a white laced
waistcoat and crimson petticoat, and who, the chroniclers say, with her
hair dressed _à la negligence_, “looks mighty pretty,” but she is very
dark, and not very well favoured, and is a poor Portuguese lady who has
the misfortune to be Queen of England, and to have the merriest and the
worst husband in Europe. Here is La Belle Stuart, with her hat cocked,
and a red plume, looking, with her sweet eye, little Roman nose, and
excellent _taille_, the greatest beauty that the Clerk of the Acts ever
did see in his life. Here is Lady Castlemaine, with a yellow plume, but
in a terrible temper that the king does not take any notice of her, and
in a rage when she finds that no gentleman presses to assist her down
from her horse. Here is “our royal brother,” James Duke of York, scowling
and sulky, on his way through the Park to Hounslow, to enjoy his prime
diversion of the chase, and escorted by a party of the guards in morions
and steel corslets. Memory be good to us! how the shadows gather around!
His Highness Oliver, Lord Protector of this realm, is being borne along
the Mall in a sedan chair. He crouches uneasily in a corner of the
gilded vehicle, as though he feared that Colonel Titus might be lying
_perdu_ under the linden trees, correcting the proof sheets of “Killing
no Murder.” Sir Fopling Flutter bids his coachman take the carriage to
Whitehall, and walks over the park with Belinda. Now, years later, it is
Jonathan Swift leaving his best gown and perriwig at Mrs. Vanhomrigh’s,
then walking up the Mall, by Buckingham House, and so to Chelsea. It is
not a very well-conducted Mall just now, and Swift tells Stella that he
is obliged to come home early through the park, to avoid the Mohocks.
Now, back again, and to walk with decorous Mr. Evelyn, who is much
shocked to see Nelly Gwynne leaning over her garden wall (overhanging the
park),—she lived at 79, Pall Mall—and indulging in familiar discourse
with “Old Rowley.” Now we are in Horace Walpole’s time, and the
macaroni-cynic of Strawberry Hill is gallanting in the Mall with Lady
Caroline Petersham, and pretty Miss Beauclerc, and foolish Mrs. Sparre.
Now Lady Coventry and Walpole’s niece, Lady Waldegrave, are mobbed in
the park for being dressed in an “outlandish” fashion. Now, back and
back again; and the Duchess of Cleveland is walking across the Mall on
a dark night, pursued by three men in masks, who offer her no violence,
but curse her as the cause of England’s misery, and prophesy that she
will one day die in a ditch, like Jane Shore. Forward, hark forward, and
mad Margaret Nicholson attempts the life of George III., as he passes in
his coach through the Mall to open Parliament. Backward, and James II.
walks across the park from St. James’s, where he had slept, to Whitehall,
to be crowned. A very few years after his coronation, the Dutch Guards
of William Prince of Orange marched across from St. James’s to turn the
unlucky Stuart out of Whitehall. And now, backwards and forwards, and
forwards and backwards, the famous shadows mingle in a fantastic reel, a
mad waltz of extinct footsteps. Sir Roger de Coverley and Mr. Spectator
saunter under the limes; Beau Fielding minces by the side of Margaretta;
Beau Tibbs airs his clean linen and lackered sword hilt; Mr. Pope meets
Lady Mary’s sedan, borne by Irish chair-men—the translator of the “Iliad”
grins spitefully over his shoulder and makes faces at Lady Mary’s black
boy; Sir Plume instructs Sir John Burke in the nice conduct of a clouded
cane; Goldsmith’s good-natured man fraternises with Coleman’s “brother
who could eat beef;” Lord Fanny takes off his three-cornered hat to Mr.
Moore, the inventor of the worm powders; Partridge, the almanack maker,
discusses the motions of the heavenly bodies on the banks of Rosamond’s
Pond with Count Algarotti, and becomes so excited that he nearly adds
“one more unfortunate” to the list of Ophelias in Rosamond’s Pond, by
tumbling into the water; Alfieri meets Lord Ligonier—tells him the
measure of his sword, and makes a rendezvous with him for sunset in Hyde
Park; Lord George Gordon passes Westminster to St. James’s, followed by
a mob of yelling, screaming Protestants. Real people dispute the passage
of the Mall with imaginary personages. The encampment of ’Eighty, the
Temple of Concord, and the Humane Society’s drags, are inextricably mixed
up with scenes from Wycherley and Etherege; and pet passages from the
“Trivia” and the “Rape of the Lock.” I must bring myself back to reason
and St. James’s Park, and eight o’clock in the morning. I must deal
henceforth in realities. Here is one.

It is the morning of the 30th of January, 1649, and a King of England
walks across the frozen park, from St. James’s, where he has slept, to
Whitehall, the palace of his fathers. Armed men walk before, armed men
walk behind and around; but they are no guards of honour. They escort a
prisoner to the scaffold. The High Court of Justice has adjudged Charles
Stuart, King of England, a traitor, and has decreed that he shall be
put to death by severing his head from his body. President Bradshaw
has put off his red robe, the man without a name has put on his black
mask; the axe is sharpened, the sawdust spread, the block prepared, the
velvet-covered coffin yawns; on its lid is already the leaden plate with
the inscription, “King Charles, 1649.”

It is not my fault, dear reader, if the spot which your author and
artist to command have selected for illustration of the eighth hour
ante-meridian, be so rich in historical and literary recollections;
that we may fancy every inch of its surface trodden and re-trodden till
the very soil has sunk, by the feet of the departed great; that the
student, and the lover of old lore, must arrest himself perforce at
every tree, and evoke remembrance at every pace. And centuries hence the
Mall of St. James’s Park will be as famous to our descendants for our
deeds as it is now to us for the presence of our ancestors. Is not the
Mall yet one of the most favoured resorts of the British aristocracy?
Do not the carriages of the nobility and gentry rattle over its broad
bosom to dinner parties, to opera, to concerts, and to balls? We have
seen their chariot lamps a hundred times—we humble pedestrians and
plebeians—gleaming among the tufted trees, wills-o’-the-wisp of Belgravia
and Tyburnia. Is not St. James’s Park bounded now as then by high and
mighty buildings: War Office, Admiralty, Stationery Office, Barracks?
Do not the Duke of York’s steps lead from the Duke of York’s column,
between two _corps de logis_, one occupied by wings—ethereal wings,
though made of brick and stucco, of the House of Carlton, the abode
of George the Great (the great Fritz was called “_der grosse_”) of
England? And the Mall itself? Is it not overlooked by Stafford House,
the palatial; by Marlborough House, the vast and roomy, once sacred to
the memory of the victor of Ramilies and of “Old Sarah!” but now given
up to some people called artists, connected with something called the
English school, and partially used as a livery and bait stable for the
late Duke of Wellington’s funeral car, with its sham trophies and sham
horses? Does not a scion of royalty, no other than his Royal Highness the
Duke of Cambridge, frequently condescend to walk from his lodgings in the
Stable-yard, Saint James’s, across the park to those Horse Guards, whose
affairs he administers with so much ability and success? And, finally,
at the western extremity of the Mall, and on the side where once was the
Mulberry Garden, stands there not now a palace, huge in size, clumsy in
its proportions, grotesque in decoration, mean in gross, frivolous in
detail, infinitely hideous in its general appearance, but above whose
ugly roof floats that grandest and noblest of all banners, the Royal
Standard of England, and whose walls, half hospital, half barrack, as
they remind us of, are hallowed as being part of Buckingham Palace, the
abode of our good, and true, and dear Queen? She lives at the top of the
Mall. She comes out by times on the Mall, in her golden coach, with the
eight cream-coloured horses; her darling little daughter passed along
the Mall to be married; let us hope, and heartily, to see more sons and
daughters yet riding to their weddings through that field of famous
footsteps. Let us hope that we may live to throw up our caps, and cry God
bless them!

Great lords and ladies sweep the Mall no more with hoops and flowing
trains of brocaded paduasoy, nor jingle on the gravel with silver spurs,
nor crunch the minute pebbles with red heels. Broughams and chariots now
convey the salt ones of the earth to their grand assemblies and solemn
merry-makings; and the few aristocrats who may yet pedestrianise within
the precincts, are so plainly attired that you would find it difficult
to distinguish them from plain Brown or Jones walking from Pimlico to
Charing Cross. His Royal Highness strides over from the Stable-yard to
the Horse Guards in a shooting-jacket and tweed trousers, and in wet
weather carries an umbrella. Nay, I have seen another Royal Highness—a
bigger Royal Highness, so to speak, for he is consort to the Queen—riding
under the trees of the Mall on a quiet bay, and dressed in anything but
the first style of fashion. Were it not _scandalum magnatum_ even to
think such a thing, I should say that his Royal Highness’s coat was seedy.

At this early eight o’clock in the morningtide, see—an exception to the
rule, however—perambulating the Mall, a tremendous “swell.” No fictitious
aristocrat, no cheap dandy, no Whitechapel buck or Bermondsey exquisite,
no apprentice who has been to a masquerade disguised as a gentleman, can
this be. Aristocracy is imprinted on every lineament of his moustached
face, in every crease of his superb clothes, in each particular horsehair
of his flowing plume. He is a magnificent creature, over six feet in
height, with a burnished helmet, burnished boots, burnished spurs,
burnished sabre, burnished cuirass—burnished whiskers and moustache.
He shines all over, like a meteor, or a lobster which has been kept
a _little_ too long, in a dark room. He is young, brave, handsome,
and generous; he is the delight of Eaton Square, the cynosure of the
Castor and Pollux Club, the idol of the corps de ballet of her Majesty’s
Theatre, the pet of several most exclusive Puseyite circles in Tyburnia,
the mirror of Tattersall’s, the pillar and patron of Jem Bundy’s ratting,
dog-showing, man-fighting, horse-racing, and general sporting house, in
Cat and Fiddle Court, Dog and Duck Lane, Cripplegate. Cruel country,
cruel fate, that compel Lieutenant Algernon Percy Plantagenet, of the
Royal Life Guards, the handsomest man in his regiment, and heir to £9,000
a year, to be mounting guard at eight o’clock in the morning! He is
mounting guard at present by smoking a cigar (one of Milo’s best) on the
Mall. By and by he will go into his barrack-room and draw caricatures in
charcoal on the whitewashed wall. He will smoke a good deal, yawn a good
deal, and whistle a good deal during the day, and will give a few words
of command. For you see, my son, that we must all earn our bread by the
sweat of our brow, and that the career even of a Plantagenet, with £9,000
a year, is not, throughout, a highway of rose-leaves!

From this gay and resplendent warrior, we fall, alas! to a very prosaic
level. As eight o’clock chimes from the smoky-faced clock of the Horse
Guards, I try in vain (I have dismissed my shadowy friends) to people
the Mall with aristocratic visitants. Alas and indeed! the magnificent
promenade of the park, on which look the stately mansions of the nobles,
is pervaded by figures very mean, very poor and forlorn in appearance.
Little troops of girls and young women are coming from the direction of
Buckingham Palace and the Birdcage Walk, but all converging towards the
Duke of York’s column: that beacon to the great shores of Vanity Fair.
These are sempstresses and milliners’ workwomen, and are bound for the
great Dress Factories of the West End. Pinched faces, pale faces, eager
faces, sullen faces, peer from under the bonnets as they pass along
and up the steps. There are faces with large mild eyes, that seem to
wonder at the world and at its strange doings, and at the existence of a
Necessity (it must be a Necessity, you know), for Jane or Ellen to work
twelve hours a day; nay, in the full London season, work at her needle
not unfrequently all night, in order that the Countess or the Marchioness
may have her ball dress ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: EIGHT O’CLOCK; OPENING SHOP.]

There is another ceremony performed with much clattering solemnity of
wooden panels, and iron bars, and stanchions, which occurs at eight
o’clock in the morning. ’Tis then that the shop-shutters are taken
down. The great “stores” and “magazines” of the principal thoroughfares
gradually open their eyes; apprentices, light-porters, and where the
staff of assistants is not very numerous, the shopmen, release the
imprisoned wares, and bid the sun shine on good family “souchong,”
“fresh Epping sausages,” “Beaufort collars,” “guinea capes,” “Eureka
shirts,” and “Alexandre harmoniums.” In the smaller thoroughfares, the
proprietor often dispenses with the aid of apprentice, light-porter, and
shopman—for the simple reason that he never possessed the services of any
assistants at all—and unostentatiously takes down the shutters of his
own chandler’s, green-grocer’s, tripe, or small stationery shop. In the
magnificent linendrapery establishments of Oxford and Regent Streets, the
vast shop-fronts, museums of fashion in plate-glass cases, offer a series
of animated _tableaux_ of _poses plastiques_ in the shape of young ladies
in morning costume, and young gentlemen in whiskers and white neckcloths,
faultlessly complete as to costume, with the exception that they are
yet in their shirt sleeves, who are accomplishing the difficult and
mysterious feat known as “dressing” the shop window. By their nimble and
practised hands the rich piled velvet mantles are displayed, the _moire_
and _glacé_ silks arranged in artful folds, the laces and gauzes, the
innumerable whim-whams and fribble-frabble of fashion, elaborately shown,
and to their best advantage.

Now, all over London, the shops start into new life. Butchers and bakers,
and candlestick makers, grocers and cheesemongers, and pastrycooks,
tailors, linendrapers, and milliners, crop up with mushroom-like
rapidity. But I must leave them, to revisit them in all their glory a few
hours later. Leave, too, the Park and its Mall, with the cows giving milk
of a decidedly metropolitan flavour, and the children and the nursemaids,
and the dilapidated dramatic authors reading the manuscripts of their
five-act tragedies to themselves, and occasionally reciting favourite
passages in deep diapason on the benches under the trees. Leave, too, the
London sparrows, and—would that we could leave it altogether—the London
smoke, which already begins to curl over and cover up the city like a
blanket, and which will not keep clear of the Mall, even at eight o’clock
in the morning.




NINE O’CLOCK A.M.—THE CLERKS AT THE BANK, AND THE BOATS ON THE RIVER.


It is nine o’clock, and London has breakfasted. Some unconsidered tens
of thousands have, it is true, already enjoyed with what appetite they
might their præ-prandial meal; the upper fifty thousand, again, have not
yet left their luxurious couches, and will not breakfast till ten, eleven
o’clock, noon; nay, there shall be sundry listless, languid members of
fast military clubs, dwellers among the tents of Jermyn Street, and the
high-priced second floors of Little Ryder Street, St. James’s, upon whom
one, two, and three o’clock in the afternoon shall be but as dawn, and
whose broiled bones and devilled kidneys shall scarcely be laid on the
damask breakfast-cloth before Sol is red in the western horizon.

I wish that, in this age so enamoured of statistical information,
when we must needs know how many loads of manure go to every acre of
turnip-field, and how many jail-birds are thrust into the black hole
_per mensem_ for fracturing their pannikins, or tearing their convict
jackets, that some M’Culloch or Caird would tabulate for me the amount of
provisions, solid and liquid, consumed at the breakfasts of London every
morning. I want to know how many thousand eggs are daily chipped, how
many of those embryo chickens are poached, and how many fried; how many
tons of quartern loaves are cut up to make bread-and-butter, thick and
thin; how many porkers have been sacrificed to provide the bacon rashers,
fat and streaky; what rivers have been drained, what fuel consumed, what
mounds of salt employed, what volumes of smoke emitted, to catch and cure
the finny haddocks and the Yarmouth bloaters, that grace our morning
repast. Say, too, Crosse and Blackwell, what multitudinous demands
are matutinally made on thee for pots of anchovy paste and preserved
tongue, covered with that circular layer—abominable disc!—of oleaginous
nastiness, apparently composed of rancid pomatum, but technically known
as clarified butter, and yet not so nasty as that adipose horror that
surrounds the truffle bedecked _pâté de foie gras_. Say, Elizabeth
Lazenby, how many hundred bottles of thy sauce (none of which are genuine
unless signed by thee) are in request to give a relish to cold meat,
game, and fish. Mysteries upon mysteries are there connected with nine
o’clock breakfasts. Queries upon queries suggest themselves to the
inquisitive mind. Speculations upon speculations present themselves to
him who is observant. Are those eggs we see in the coffee-shop windows,
by the side of the lean chop with a curly tail, the teapot with the
broken spout, and the boulder-looking kidneys, ever eaten, and if so,
what secret do the coffee-shop proprietors possess of keeping them from
entire decomposition? For I have watched these eggs for weeks together,
and known them by bits of straw and flecks of dirt mucilaginously
adhering to their shells, to be the selfsame eggs; yet when I have
entered the unpretending house of refreshment, and ordered “tea and an
egg,” I have seen the agile but dingy handmaiden swiftly approach the
window, slide the glass panel back with nimble (though dusky) fingers,
convey an egg to the mysterious kitchen in the background, and in a few
minutes place the edible before me boiled, yet with sufficient marks of
the straw upon it to enable me to discern my ancient friend. Who, again,
invented muffins?—and what becomes of all the cold crossbuns after Good
Friday? I never saw a crossbun on Holy Saturday, and I believe the boy
most addicted to saccharine dainties would scorn one.

So hungry London breakfasts, but not uniformly well, at nine o’clock in
the morning. In quietly grim squares, in the semi-aristocratic North-West
End—I don’t mean Russell and Bloomsbury, but Gordon, Tavistock, Queen,
and Camden, on the one side, and Manchester and Portman on the other—the
nine o’clock breakfast takes place in the vast comfortless dining-room,
with the shining side-board (purchased at the sale of Sir Hector Ajacks,
the great Indian general’s, effects), and the portrait of the master of
the house (Debenham Storr, R.A., pinxit), crimson curtain and column in
foreground, dessert plate, cut orange, and—supposed—silver hand-bell in
front ditto. This is the sort of room where there is a Turkey carpet that
has been purchased at the East India Company’s sale rooms, in Billiter
Street, and which went cheap because there was a hole in one corner,
carefully darned subsequently by the mistress of the house. The master
comes down stairs gravely, with a bald head—the thin, gray hair carefully
brushed over the temples, and a duffel dressing-gown. He spends five
minutes in his “study,” behind the breakfast dining-room; not, goodness
knows, to consult the uncut books on the shelves—uncomfortable works,
like Helps’s “Friends in Council,” that scrap of rusty BACON, and Mr.
Harriet Martineau’s “India,” are among the number; but to break the seals
of the letters ranged for him on the leather-covered table—he reads
his correspondence at breakfast—to unlock, perchance, one drawer, take
out his cheque-book, and give it one hasty flutter, one loving glance,
and to catch up and snuggle beneath his arm the copy of the “Times”
newspaper, erst damped, but since aired at the kitchen fire, which the
newsvender’s boy dropped an hour since down the area. It may be, too,
that he goes into that uselessly (to him) book-furnished room, because
he thinks it a good, a grand, a respectable thing to have a “study” at
all. This is the sort of house where they keep a footman, single-handed—a
dull knave, who no more resembles the resplendent flunkey of Eaton Square
or Westbourne Terrace, than does the cotton-stockinged “greencoat” of
the minor theatres; who is told that he must wear a morning jacket, and
who accoutres himself in a striped jerkin, baggy in the back and soiled
at the elbows, that makes him look like an hostler, related, on the
mother’s side, to a Merry Andrew. The mistress of the house comes down
to nine o’clock breakfast, jingling the keys in her little basket, and
with anxious pre-occupation mantling from her _guipure_ collar to her
false front, for those fatal crimson housekeeping books are to be audited
this morning, and she is nervous. The girls come down in brown-holland
jackets and smartly dowdy skirts, dubious as to the state of their back
hair; the eldest daughter frowning after her last night’s course of
theology (intermingled with the last novel from Mr. Mudie’s). As a rule,
the young ladies are very ill-tempered; and, equally as a rule, there
is always one luckless young maiden in a family of grown-up daughters
who comes down to breakfast with her stockings down at heel, and is
sternly reprimanded during breakfast because one of her shoes comes off
under the table; he who denounces her being her younger brother, the
lout in the jacket, with the surreptitious peg-top in his pocket, who
attends the day-school of the London University, and cribs his sisters’
Berlin-wool canvas to mend his Serpentine yacht sails with. The children
too old to breakfast in the nursery come down gawky, awkward, tumbling,
and discontented, for they are as yet considered too young to partake
of the frizzled bits of bacon which are curling themselves in scorched
agony on the iron footman before the grate, the muffins, which sodden in
yellow butter-pools in the Minton plates on the severely-creased damask
table-cloth, or the dry toast which, shrivelled and forbidding, grins
from between the Sheffield-plated bars of the rack. The servants come
in, not to morning breakfast, but to morning prayers. The housemaid has
just concluded her morning flirtation with the baker; the cook has been
crying over “Fatherless Fanny.” The master of the house reads prayers
in a harsh, grating voice, and Miss Charlotte, aged thirteen, is sent
to her bed-room, with prospects of additional punishment, for eating
her curl-papers during matins. The first organ-grinder arrives in the
square during breakfast; and the master of the house grimly reproves the
children who are beginning to execute involuntary polkas on their chairs,
and glowers at the governess—she is such a meek young creature, marked
with the small-pox, that I did not think it worth while to mention her
before—who manifests symptoms of beating her sad head to the music. How
happy, at least how relieved, everybody is when the master exchanges
his duffel dressing-gown for a blue body-coat, takes his umbrella, and
drives off in his brougham to the city or Somerset House! The children
are glad to go to their lessons, though they hate _them_ at most times,
passably. Miss Meek, the governess, is glad to install herself in her
school-room, and grind “Mangnall’s Questions,” and “Blair’s Preceptor,”
till the children’s dinner, at one o’clock; though she would, perhaps,
prefer shutting herself up in her own room and having a good cry. The
mistress finds consolation, too, in going downstairs and quarrelling
with the cook, and then going upstairs and being quarrelled with by the
nurse. Besides, there will be plenty of time for shopping before Mr.
M. comes home. The girls are delighted that cross papa is away. Papa
always wants to know what the letters are about which they write at the
little walnut-tree tables with the twisted legs. Papa objects to the
time wasted in working the application collars. Papa calls novel reading
and pianoforte practice “stuff,” with a very naughty adjective prefixed
thereunto. This is the sort of house that is neatly, solidly furnished
from top to toe, with every modern convenience and improvement: with
bath-rooms, conservatories, ice cellars; with patent grates, patent
door-handles, dish-lifts, asbestos stoves, gas cooking ranges, and
excruciatingly complicated ventilatory contrivances; and this is also the
sort of house where, with all the conveniences I have mentioned, every
living soul who inhabits it is uncomfortable.

As the clock strikes nine, you see the last school-children flock in to
the narrow alley behind St. Martin’s Lane, hard by the Lowther Arcade,
and leading to the national schools. They have been romping and playing
in the street this half-hour; and it was but the iron tongue of St.
Martin that interrupted that impending fight between the young brothers
Puddicomb, from King Street, Long Acre, who are always fighting, and
that famous clapper-clawing match between Polly Briggs and Susey Wright.
At the last stroke of nine there hurries into the school corridor a
comely female teacher in a green plaid shawl: and, woe be unto her! nine
has struck full ten minutes, when the inevitable laggard of every school
appears, half skurrying, half crawling, her terror combating with her
sluggishness, from the direction of Leicester Square. She is a gaunt,
awkward girl, in a “flibberty-flobberty” hat, a skimping gray cape, with
thunder-and-lightning buttons, an absurdly short skirt, and lace-edged
trousers, that trail over her sandaled shoes. Add to this her slate
and satchel, and she is complete. When will parents cease, I wonder,
to attire their children in this ridiculous and preposterous manner.
Hannah (her name is Hannah, for certain!) left her home in Bear Street in
excellent time for school; but she has dawdled, and loitered, and gloated
over every sweetstuff and picture shop, and exchanged languid repartees
with rude boys. She will be kept in to a certainty this afternoon, will
Hannah!

Now is the matutinal occupation of the milkwoman nearly gone; her last
cries of “Milk, ho!” die away in faint echoes, and she might reasonably
be supposed to enjoy a holiday till the afternoon’s milk for tea were
required; but not so. To distant dairies she hies, and to all appearances
occupies herself in scrubbing her milk pails till three o’clock. I have
a great affection (platonic) for milkwomen. I should like to go down
to Wales and see them when they are at home. What clean white cotton
stockings they wear, on—no, not their legs—on the posts which support
their robust torsos! How strong they are! There are many I should be
happy to back, and for no inconsiderable trifle either, to thrash Ben
Gaunt. Did you ever know any one who courted a milkwoman? Was there ever
a milkwoman married, besides Madam Vestris, in the “Wonderful Woman?”
Yes; I love them—their burly forms; their mahogany faces, handsomely
veneered by wind and weather; their coarse straw bonnets flattened at
the top; their manly lace-up boots, and those wonderful mantles on
their shoulders, which are neither shawl, tippet, cape nor scarf, but a
compound of all, and are of equally puzzling colour and patterns.

The postman is breakfasting in the interval between the eight and the ten
o’clock delivery. Does he take his scarlet tunic off when he breakfasts?
Does he beguile the short hour of refreshment by reading, between snaps
of bread and butter and gulps of coffee, short extracts from “A Double
Knock at the Postman’s Conscience,” by the Reverend Mr. Davis, Ordinary
of Newgate? For if the postman reads not during breakfast-time, I am
wholly at a loss to know, dog-tired as he must be when he comes home from
his rounds at night, when he can find time for pursuing his literary
studies. By the way, where does the postman lodge? I have occupied
apartments in the same house with a policeman; I was once aware of the
private residence of a man who served writs; and I have taken tea in
the parlour of the Pandean pipes to a Punch-and-Judy; but I never knew
personally the abode of a postman. Mr. Sculthorpe and Mr. Peacock know
them but too frequently, to the postman’s cost.

Nine o’clock, and the _grande armée_ of “musicianers” debouches from
Spitalfields, and Leather Lane, Holborn, and far-off Clerkenwell, and,
in compact columns, move westward. Nine o’clock, and the sonorous cry
of “Old clo’!” is heard in sequestered streets chiefly inhabited by
bachelors. Nine o’clock, and another _grande armée_ veers through Temple
Bar, charges down Holborn Hill, escalades Finsbury, captures Cornhill by
a dexterous flank movement, and sits down and invests the Bank of England
in regular form. This is London going to business in the city.

[Illustration: NINE O’CLOCK A.M.: OMNIBUSES AT THE BANK.]

[Illustration: NINE O’CLOCK A.M.: PENNY STEAMBOATS ALONGSIDE THE PIER AT
LONDON BRIDGE.]

If the morning be fine, the pavement of the Strand and Fleet Street looks
quite radiant with the spruce clerks walking down to their offices,
governmental, financial, and commercial. Marvellous young bucks some
of them are. These are the customers, you see at a glance, whom the
resplendent wares in the hosiers’ shops attract, and in whom those wary
industrials find avid customers. These are the dashing young parties who
purchase the pea-green, the orange, and the rose-pink gloves; the crimson
braces, the kaleidoscopic shirt-studs, the shirts embroidered with
dahlias, deaths’ heads, race-horses, sun-flowers, and ballet-girls; the
horseshoe, fox-head, pewter-pot-and-crossed-pipes, willow-pattern-plate,
and knife-and-fork pins. These are the glasses of city fashion, and the
mould of city form, for whom the legions of fourteen, of fifteen, of
sixteen, and of seventeen shilling trousers, all unrivalled, patented,
and warranted, are made; for these ingenious youths coats with strange
names are devised, scarves and shawls of wondrous pattern and texture
despatched from distant Manchester and Paisley. For them the shiniest
of hats, the knobbiest of sticks, gleam through shop-windows; for them
the geniuses of “all-round collars” invent every week fresh yokes of
starched linen, pleasant instruments of torture, reminding us equally
of the English pillory, the Chinese cangue, the Spanish garotte, the
French _lucarne_ to the guillotine (that window from which the criminal
looks out into eternity), and the homely and cosmopolitan dog-collar!
There are some of these gay clerks who go down to their offices with
roses at their button-holes, and with cigars in their mouths; there are
some who wear peg-top trousers, chin-tufts, eye-glasses, and varnished
boots. These mostly turn off in the Strand, and are in the Admiralty or
Somerset House. As for the government clerks of the extreme West-end—the
patricians of the Home and Foreign Offices—the bureaucrats of the
Circumlocution Office, in a word—_they_ ride down to Whitehall or
Downing Street in broughams or on park hacks. Catch them in omnibuses,
or walking on the vulgar pavement, forsooth! The flags of Regent Street
they might indeed tread gingerly, at three o’clock in the afternoon; but
the Strand, and at nine o’clock in the morning! Forbid it, gentility! I
observe—to return to the clerks who are bending citywards—that the most
luxuriant whiskers belong to the Bank of England. I believe that there
are even whisker clubs in that great national institution, where prizes
are given for the best pair of _favoris_ grown without macassar. You may,
as a general rule, distinguish government from commercial clerks by the
stern repudiation of the razor, as applied to the beard and moustaches,
by the former; and again I may remark, that the prize for the thinnest
and most dandy-looking umbrellas must be awarded, as of right, to the
clerks in the East India House—mostly themselves slim, natty gentlemen,
of jaunty appearance, who are all supposed to have had tender affairs
with the widows of East India colonels. You may know the cashiers in the
private banking houses by their white hats and buff waistcoats; you may
know the stock-brokers by their careering up Ludgate Hill in dog-carts,
and occasionally tandems, and by the pervading sporting appearance of
their costume; you may know the Jewish commission agents by their flashy
broughams, with lapdogs and ladies in crinoline beside them; you may know
the sugar-bakers and the soap-boilers by the comfortable double-bodied
carriages with fat horses in which they roll along; you may know the
Manchester warehousemen by their wearing gaiters, always carrying their
hands in their pockets, and frequently slipping into recondite city
taverns up darksome alleys, on their way to Cheapside, to make a quiet
bet or so on the Chester Cup or the Liverpool Steeplechase; you may know,
finally, the men with a million of money, or thereabouts, by their being
ordinarily very shabby, and by their wearing shocking bad hats, which
have seemingly never been brushed, on the backs of their heads.

“Every road,” says the proverb, “leads to Rome;” every commercial
ways leads to the Bank of England. And there, in the midst of that
heterogeneous architectural jumble between the Bank of England itself,
the Royal Exchange, the Poultry, Cornhill, and the Globe Insurance
Office, the vast train of omnibuses, that have come from the West and
that have come from the East—that have been rumbling along the Macadam
while I was prosing on the pedestrians—with another great army of clerk
martyrs outside and inside, their knees drawn up to their chins, and
their chins resting on their umbrella handles, set down their loads of
cash-book and ledger fillers. What an incalculable mass of figures must
there be collected in those commercial heads! What legions of _£. s. d._!
What a chaos of cash debtor, contra creditor, bills payable, and bills
receivable; waste-books, day-books, cash-books, and journals; insurance
policies, brokerage, agio, tare and tret, dock warrants, and general
commercial bedevilment! They file off to their several avocations, to
spin money for others, often, poor fellows, while they themselves are
blest with but meagre stipends. They plod away to their gloomy wharves
and hard-hearted counting-houses, where the chains from great cranes wind
round their bodies, and they dance hornpipes in bill-file and cash-box
fetters, and the mahogany of the desks enters into their souls. Upon my
word, I think if I were doomed to clerkdom, that I should run away and
enlist; but that would avail me little, for I am equally certain that,
were I a grenadier, and my commanding officer made me mount guard, that I
should pop my musket into the sentry-box and run away too.

So the omnibuses meet at the Bank and disgorge the clerks by hundreds;
repeating this operation scores of times between nine and ten o’clock.
But you are not to delude yourself, that either by wheeled vehicle or by
the humbler conveyances known as “Shanks’s mare,” and the “Marrowbone
stage”—in more refined language, walking—have all those who have business
in the city reached their destination. No; the Silent Highway has been
their travelling route. On the broad—would that I could add the silvery
and sparkling—bosom of Father Thames, they have been borne in swift,
grimy little steamboats, crowded with living freights from Chelsea,
and Pimlico, and Vauxhall piers, from Hungerford, Waterloo, Temple,
Blackfriars, and Southwark—straight by the hay-boats, with their lateen
sails discoloured in a manner that would delight a painter, straight
by Thames police hulks, by four and six-oared cutters, by coal-barges,
and great lighters laden with bricks and ashes and toiling towards
Putney and Richmond; by oozy wharves and grim-chimneyed factories; by
little, wheezy, tumbledown waterside public-houses; by breweries, and
many-windowed warehouses; by the stately gardens of the Temple, and the
sharp-pointed spires of city churches, and the great dome of Paul’s
looming blue in the morning, to the Old Shades Pier, hard by London
Bridge. There is landing and scuffling and pushing; the quivering old
barges, moored in the mud, are swaying and groaning beneath trampling
feet. Then, for an instant, Thames Street, Upper and Lower, is invaded
by an ant-hill swarm of spruce clerks, who mingle strangely with the
fish-women and the dock-porters. But the insatiable counting-houses soon
swallow them up: as though London’s commercial maw were an hungered too,
for breakfast, at nine o’clock in the morning.




TEN O’CLOCK A.M.—THE COURT OF QUEEN’S BENCH, AND THE “BENCH” ITSELF.


The author presents his compliments to the “neat-handed Phillis”
who answers (when she is in a good temper, which is but seldom) the
second-floor bell, takes in his letters, brings up his breakfast,
stands in perpetual need of being warned not to light the fire with the
proof-sheets of his last novel, pamphlet on the war, or essay on the
Æolic digamma, or twist into cigar-lights the cheques for large amounts
continually sent him by his munificent publishers, and exercises her
right of search over his tea-caddy and the drawer containing his cravats,
all-round collars, and billet-doux; the author and your servant presents
his compliments to Phillis—ordinarily addressed by Mrs. Lillicrap,
the landlady, as “Mariar, you ’ussey”—and begs her to procure for him
immediately a skin of the creamiest parchment, free from grease, a bottle
of record ink, a quill plucked from the wing of a hawk, vulture, or some
kindred bird of prey, a box of pounce, a book of patterns of German text
for engrossing, and a hank of red tape or green ferret, whichsoever, in
her æsthetic judgment, she may prefer. He would be further obliged if
she would step round to the author’s solicitor, and ask, not for that
little bill of costs, which has been ready for some time, but which he
is not in the slightest hurry for—but for copies of Tidd’s Practice, the
Law List, and Lord St. Leonards’ “Handy Book on Property Law.” For I,
the author, intend to be strictly legal at ten o’clock in the morning.
I serve you with this copy of “Twice Round the Clock” as with a writ;
and in the name of Victoria, by the grace, &c., send you greeting, and
command—no, not command, but beg—that within eight days you enter an
appearance, to purchase this volume. Else will I invoke the powers of
the great _ca. sa._ and the terrible _fi. fa._ I will come against you,
with sticks and staves, and the sheriff of Middlesex shall take you, to
have and to hold, wheresoever you may be found running up and down in
his bailiwick. _Son nutrito di latte legale._ I am fed with law’s milk
at this hour of the morning. Shear me the sheep for vellum, fill me with
quips and quiddities; bind me apprentice to a law stationer in the Lane
of Chancery, over-against Cursitor Street; and let me also send in a
little bill of costs to my publishers, and charge them so much a “folio,”
instead of so much a “sheet.”

This exercitation over, and the necessary stationery brought by Phillis,
_alias_ “Mariar,” I approach my great, grim subject with diffident
respect. What do I know of law, save that if I pay not, the Alguazils
will lay me by the heels; that if I steal, I shall go to the hulks;
that if I kill, I shall go hang? What do I know of _Sinderesis_,
feoffors and feoffees, and the law of tailed lands? What of the Assize
of _Mortdancestor_, tenants in dower, villein entry—of _Sylva cædua_,
which is, I am sure you will be glad to hear, more familiarly known as
the 45th of Edward the Third? These things are mysteries to me. I bought
the _habeas corpus_ once (the palladium of our liberties is an expensive
luxury), but its custodian scarcely allowed me to look at it, and,
hailing a cab, desired me to “look alive.” I have been defendant in an
action, but I never could make out why they should have done the things
to me that they did, and why John Lord Campbell at Westminster should
have been so bitter against me. I never was on a jury; but I have enjoyed
the acquaintance of an Irish gentleman whose presence on the panel was
considered invaluable at state trials, he having the reputation of an
indomitable “boot-eater.” Finally, I have, as most men have, a solicitor,
a highly respectable party, who, of course, only charges me the “costs
out of pocket.” But what is the exact measure of “costs out of pocket?” I
never knew.

Not wholly destitute of legal literature is your servant, however. In
Pope and Arbuthnot’s Reports (_vide_ Miscellanies) I have read the great
case of Stradlings _versus_ Styles, respecting the piebald horses and
the horses that were pied, and have pondered much over that notable
conclusion (in Norman-French) by the reporter—“Je heard no more parceque
j’etais asleep sur mong bench.” I have followed the arguments in Bardell
_versus_ Pickwick: I have seen the “Avocat Patelin” and the “Lottery
Ticket;” I have paced the Salle des Pas Perdus in Paris, and Westminster
Hall, London; I knew a captain once who lived in the equally defunct
“rules” of the Queen’s Bench; and I have played racquets in the area of
that establishment, as an amateur(?). So, then, though, in a very humble
degree, I conceive myself qualified to discourse to you concerning legal
London at ten o’clock in the morning.

The judges of the land—of Queen’s Bench, Exchequer, and Common Pleas,
Chief-Justices, Barons, and Puisne Judges, and Sages of the Court of
Probate, Divorce, and Matrimonial Causes—are mostly jaunty, elderly
gentlemen of cheerful appearance, given in private life to wearing
light neckcloths, buff waistcoats, and pepper-and-salt trousers, and
particularly addicted to trotting down to the Courts of Westminster
mounted on stout hacks—’tis the bishops, _par excellence_, who ride
the cobs—and followed by sober grooms. There are judges who, it is
reported, make up considerable books for the Derby and Oaks—nay, for
the double event. I have seen a judge in a white hat, and I have seen a
vice-chancellor drinking iced fruit effervescent at Stainsbury’s in the
Strand.

Parliament Street and Palace Yard are fair to see, this pleasant morning
in Term time. The cause list for all the courts is pretty full, and
there is a prospect of nice legal pickings. The pavement is dotted
with barristers’ and solicitors’ clerks carrying blue and crimson bags
plethoric with papers. Smart attorneys, too, with shoe-ribbon, light
vests, swinging watch-guards, and shiny hats (they have begun to wear
moustaches even, the attorneys!), bustle past, papers beneath their arms,
open documents in their hands, which they sort and peruse as they walk.
The parti-coloured fastenings of these documents flutter, so that you
would take these men of law for so many conjurors about to swallow red
and green tape. And they do conjure, and to a tune, the attorneys. Lank
office-boys, in hats too large, and corduroys and tweeds too short, and
jackets, stained with ink, too short for them; cadaverous office-runners
and process-servers, in greasy and patched habiliments, white at the
seams; bruised and battered, ruby-nosed law-writers, skulking down to
Westminster in quest of a chance copying job; managing clerks, staid
men given to abdominal corpulence, who wear white neckcloths, plaited
shirt-frills, black satin waistcoats, and heavy watch chains and seals,
worn, in the good old fashion, underneath the vest, and pendulous
from the base line thereof, file along the pavement to their common
destination, the great Hall of Pleas at Westminster. The great solicitors
and attorneys, men who may be termed the princes of law, who are at the
head of vast establishments in Bedford Row and Lincoln’s Inn Fields,
and whose practice is hereditary, dash along in tearing cabs: you look
through the windows, and see an anxious man, with bushy gray whiskers,
sitting inside; the cushions beside and before him littered, piled,
cumbered, with tape-tied papers. He has given Sir Fitzroy three hundred,
Sir Richard five hundred, guineas, for an hour’s advocacy. Thousands
depend upon the decision of the twelve worthy men who will be in the
jury-box in the course of an hour. See! one of them is cheapening apples
at a stall at this very moment, and tells his companion (who has just
alighted from a chaise-cart) that in that little shop yonder Marley
murdered the watchmaker’s shopman. Great lawyers such as these have as
many noble fortunes in their hands as great doctors have noble lives.
Of the secrets of noble reputations, doctors and lawyers are alike
custodians; and, trustworthy.

The briefless barristers would like to patronise cabs, but they can’t
afford those luxuries. They walk down Parliament Street arm-in-arm,
mostly men with bold noses of the approved Slawkenbergius pattern, and
very large red or sandy whiskers. Whiskers cost nothing, noses are
cheap—I had mine broken once for nothing, though it cost me several
pounds sterling to get it mended again. Their briefless clothes are very
worn and threadbare, their hats napless, their umbrellas—they always
carry umbrellas—gape at the mouth, and distend at the nozzle. These
barristers are second wranglers, fellows of their college, prizemen; they
have pulled stroke-oar, and bibbed at wine parties given by marquises.
They are very poor and briefless now. The chambers in the Temple are very
high up; the carpet, ragged; the laundress is a tipsy shrew who pilfers;
the boot-boy insists upon serving up small coal broiled with the mutton
chops. It is but seldom, but very seldom, that they can order a steak
at the “Rainbow,” or demand a bottle of Port from the plump waiter the
“Cock.” No attorneys ascend their staircase; no briefs are frayed in
being pushed through the aperture of their letter-boxes; editors are
deaf, and the only magazine which receives their contributions don’t pay.
They cannot help asking themselves sometimes, sadly and querulously,
poor fellows, of what avail is the grand classical education, tedious
and expensive; the slaving for a degree or for honours; the long nights
spent beneath the glare of the reading lamp, learning and re-learning the
palimpsests of law; of what avail are the joints of mutton and bottles of
heady wine consumed at the keeping-term dinners; of what avail the square
of the hypothenuse, and the knowledge (in the best Latin) that strong men
lived before Agamemnon; of what avail the wig (it is getting unpowdered),
the gown (it is growing threadbare), and the big Greek prize-books
with the College arms emblazoned on the covers? Lo! there is Tom
Cadman, who has been an unsuccessful play-actor and an usher in a cheap
boarding-school, writing leaders for a daily paper in the coffee-room of
the “Albion,” or returning thanks for the press at a champagne dinner;
there is Roger Bullyon, of the Home Circuit, whose only talent is abuse,
who knows no more of law than he does of the conduct to be expected from
a gentleman, who will never, if he live till ninety, be more than a
fluent, insolent donkey, and yet there he is, with more briefs than he
can carry, or his clerk compute the fees on. But console yourselves, oh,
ye briefless ones. Though the race be not to the swift, nor the battle to
the strong, your chance is yet in the lucky-bag; the next dive may bring
it forth splendid and triumphant.

    “No one is so accursed by fate,
    No one so utterly desolate,
    But some heart, though unknown,
    Responds unto his own.”

Mr. Right, the attorney, is coming post-haste after you, his waistcoat
pockets distended with retainers and refreshers. In that tremendous
lottery of the law, as wise Mr. Thackeray terms it, who shall say that
you may not be next the fortunate wretches who shall win the prize—the
_gros lot_? To-day is poverty and heart-sickening hope deferred and
the pawn-shop; but to-morrow may make you the thunderer before the
judicial committee of the Privy Council on the great appeal from Bombay,
Parsetjee-Jamsetjee-Ramsetjee Loll _versus_ Boomajee-Krammajee-Howdajee
Chow. It may make you standing counsel to the Feejee Islands Company, or
defender of group 97 of Railway Bills. So, despair not, briefless man;
but pause before you sell that sheet anchor of hope, of yours, for old
iron.

Barristers in large practice drive over Westminster Bridge’s crazy arches
(the rogues have houses at Norwood and Tulse Hill, with conservatories
and pineries) in small phætons or gleaming clarences, with sleek white
horses. They have wives rustling in sheeny silks and glowing with
artificial flowers, who, their lords being deposited in the temple of
Theseus, are borne straight away to Stagg and Mantell’s, or Waterloo
House; or, perchance, to that glorious avenue of Covent Garden Market,
where they price cucumbers at Mrs. Solomon’s, and bouquets at Mrs.
Buck’s. For, note it as a rule, though it may seem a paradox, people who
have kitchen-gardens and hot-houses are always buying fruit, flowers,
and vegetables. The steady-going old Nisi Prius barristers, in good
practice—sedate fogies—with their white neckcloths twisted like halters
round their necks; pompous old fellows, who jingle keys and sovereigns in
their pockets, as, their hands therein, they prop up the door-jambs of
the robing-room, in converse with weasel-faced attorneys, are borne to
Westminster in cabs. Very hard are they upon the cabman, paying him but
the exact fare, and threatening him with the severest terrors of the law
at the slightest attempt at overcharge; and much are they maledicted by
the badged Jehus as they drive slowly away. These Nisi Prius worthies are
great hands at a rubber of whist, and are as good judges of port-wine as
they are of law.

Whence comes the Chief, the leader, the great advocate of the day, who
carries attorney and solicitor general, chief-justice, chancellor,
peer, written as legibly on his brow as Cain carried the brand?—how he
reaches Westminster Hall, or how he gets away from it, no man can tell.
He will make a four hours’ speech to-day, drive eight witnesses to the
verge of distraction, blight with sarcasm, and sear with denunciation, a
semi-idiotic pig-jobber, the defendant in an action of breach of promise
of marriage, in which the plaintiff is a stay-maker of the mature age
of thirty-seven. What shrieks of laughter will ring through the court
when in burning accents, in which irony is mingled with indignation, the
Chief reads passages from the love-smitten but incautious pig-jobber’s
correspondence, and quotes from his poetical effusions (they _will_ write
poetry, these defendants) such passages as—

    “When you tork
    You are like roast pork.”

Or,

    “Say, luvley chine,
    Will you be mine.”

Two hours afterwards, and the Chief will be on the other side of
Westminster Hall, in the Commons’ House of Parliament, pounding away on
the wrongs of a few people in Staffordshire who object to the odour of
some neighbouring gas-works, and, to use an Americanism, “chawing up”
the ministry at a tremendous rate. How is it that about the same time he
manages to dine with the Merchant Cobblers at their grand old hall on St.
Crispin’s Hill; to take the chair at the festival of the Association for
improving the moral condition of Mudlarks; to make a two hours’ speech
at the meeting for the suppression of street “catch-’em-alive-O’s;” to
look in at half-a-dozen west-end clubs; to hear Bosio—ah! poor Bosio,
ah, poor swan, miasma’d to death in the horrid marshes of Ingria and
Carelia—in the last act of the “Traviata;” and to be seen flitting out
of the bar-parlour of Joe Muttonfist’s hostelry in Mauley Court-yard,
Whitechapel, where the whereabouts of the impending great fight between
Dan Bludyer, surnamed the “Mugger,” and Tim Sloggan, better known as
“Copperscull,” for two hundred pounds a-side, will be imparted to the
patrons of the “fancy?” Tom Stoat, who knows everything and everybody,
says he saw the Chief at the Crystal Palace Flower Show, and it is
certain that he (the Chief) will be at the Queen’s Ball to-night (he has
a dinner party this evening), and that after the opera he will take a
chop and kidney at Evans’s. And after that? What a life! What frame can
bear, what mind endure it! When does he study? when does he read those
mammoth briefs? when does he note those cases, prepare those eloquent
exordia and perorations? Whence comes the minute familiarity with every
detail of the case before him which he seems to possess, the marvellous
knowledge he displays of the birth, parentage, education, and antecedents
of the trembling witnesses whom he cross-examines? What a career! and
see, there is its Hero, shambling into Westminster Hall, a spare,
shrunken, stooping, prematurely-aged man. He has not had a new wig these
ten years, and his silk gown is shabby, almost to raggedness. He is no
doubt arguing some abstruse point of law with that voluble gentleman,
his companion, in the white waistcoat. Let us approach and listen, for I
am Asmodeus and we are eaves-droppers. Point of law! Upon my word, he is
talking about the Chester Cup.

[Illustration: TEN O’CLOCK A.M.: INTERIOR OF THE COURT OF QUEEN’S BENCH.]

In with ye, then, my merry men all, to the hall of Westminster, for
the Court of Queen’s Bench is sitting. It is not a handsome court; it
is not an imposing court. If I were to say that it was a very mean and
ugly room, quite unworthy to figure as an audience-chamber for the
judges of the land, I don’t think that I should be in error. Where are
the lictors and the fasces? Where the throned daïs on which the wise
men of the Archeopagus should properly sit? The bench looks but an
uncomfortable settle! the floor of the court is a ridiculous little
quadrangle of oak, like a pie-board; the witness-box is so small that it
seems capable of holding nothing but the shooting “Jack” of our toyshop
experience; and the jury-box has a strong family likeness to one of
the defunct Smithfield sheep-pens, where sit the intelligent jury, who
have an invincible propensity, be the weather hot or cold, for wiping
their foreheads with blue cotton pocket handkerchiefs. A weary martyrdom
some of those poor jurymen pass; understanding a great deal more about
the case on which they have to deliver at its commencement than at
its termination; bemused, bewildered, and dazzled by the rhetorical
flourishes and ingenious sophistry of the counsel on both sides, and
utterly nonplussed by the elaborately obscure pleas that are put in. But
the usher has sworn them in that they “shall will and truly try” the
matter before them; and try it they must. To a man who has, perhaps, a
matter of sixty or seventy thousand pounds at stake on the issue of a
trial, the proceedings of most tribunals seem characterised by strange
indifference, and an engaging, though, to the plaintiff and defendant, a
somewhat irritating _laisser aller_. The attorneys take snuff with one
another, and whisper jokes. The counsel chat and poke each other in the
ribs; the briefless ones, in the high back rows, scribble caricatures on
their blotting-pads, or pretend to pore over “faggot” briefs, or lounge
from the Queen’s Bench into the Exchequer, and from the Exchequer into
the Bail Court, and so on and into the Common Pleas; the usher nods, and
cries, “Silence,” sleepily; the clerk reads in a droning monotonous voice
documents of the most vital importance, letters that destroy and blast
a life-long reputation of virtue and honour: letters that bring shame
on noble women, and ridicule on distinguished men; vows of affection,
slanderous accusations, outbursts of passion, anonymous denunciations,
ebullitions of love, hatred, revenge. Some one is here, doubtless,
to report the case for to-morrow’s papers, but no active pens seem
moving. The Chief has not assumed his legal harness yet; and the junior
counsel employed in the case are bungling over their preliminaries.
The faded moreen curtains; the shabby royal arms above the judge, with
their tarnished gilding, subdued-looking lion, and cracked unicorn; the
ink-stained, grease-worn desks and forms; the lack-lustre, threadbare
auditory, with woe-be-gone garments and mien, who fill up the hinderpart
of the auditory: though what they can want in the Court of Queen’s Bench
Heaven only knows; the bombazine-clad barristers, in their ill-powdered
wigs—quite fail in impressing you with a sense of anything like grandeur
or dignity. Yet you are in _Banco Reginâ_. Here our sovereign lady
the Queen is supposed to sit herself in judgment; and from this court
emanates the Great Writ of Right—the Habeas Corpus. To tell the truth,
neither counsel, jury, nor audience seem to know or to care much about
what is going on; but there are three persons who sit up aloft—not
exactly sweet little cherubs, for they are very old, wrinkled men—who
know the case like a book, and considerably better than many books; who
have weighed the _pros_ and _cons_ to the minutest hair’s breath, to a
feather’s turn of the scale, who are awake and alive, alive O! to all
the rhetorical flourishes and ingenious sophistry of the advocates, and
who will tell the jury exactly what the case is made of in about a tithe
of the time that the junior counsel would take in enumerating wrongs of
which the plaintiff complains, or whose commission the defendant denies.
It is an edifying sight to watch the presiding judge—that shrivelled
man in petticoats—with his plain scratch wig all awry. Now he hugs his
arms within his capacious sleeves; now he crosses his legs; now, yes,
now he twiddles his judicial thumbs; now he nods his august head, allows
it to recline over one shoulder, and seems on the point of falling off
to sleep; now he leans wearily, his cheek in his hand, his elbow on
the bench, first on one side, then on the other; then he rises, shakes
his old head, yawns, and, with his hands in his pockets, surveys the
outer bar through gold-rimmed spectacles. He seems the most bored, the
most indifferent spectator there; but only wait till the chiefs on both
sides have concluded their eloquent bamboozling of the jury; mark my
Lord Owlett settle his wig and his petticoats then, sort and unfold the
notes he has been lazily (so it seemed) scrawling from time to time, and
in a piping, quavering voice, begin to read from them. You marvel at
the force, the clarity, the perspicuity of the grand old man; you stand
abashed before the intellect, clear as crystal, at an age when man’s
mind as well as his body is oft-times but labour and sorrow; you are
astonished that so much vigour, so much shrewdness, so much eloquence,
should exist in that worn and tottering casket. Goodness knows, I am not
an optimist, and give but too much reason to be accused of _nil admirari_
tendencies; yet I cannot help thinking that if on this earth there exists
a body of men grandly wise, generously eloquent, nobly impartial, and
sternly incorruptible, those men are the judges of England.

Come away though, now, Don Cleophas; we must go further afield. The case
that is “on” just now is not of sufficient interest to detain us; though
here is an episode sufficiently grotesque. An old lady is entitled to
some damages, or to some verdict, or to some money or apology, or, at all
events, something from somebody. My Lord Owlett suggests a compromise,
and instructs counsel to ask her what she will take to settle matters.

“What will you take?” asks the gentleman in the bob-tailed wig of the old
lady.

Now the old lady is very deaf, and merely shakes her head at the counsel,
informing the jury, in confidence, that she is “very hard o’ hearin’.”

“His Lordship wants to know what you will take?” asks the counsel again;
this time bawling as loud as ever he can in the old lady’s ear.

“I thank his lordship kindly,” the ancient dame answers stoutly, “and if
it’s no illconwenience to him, _I’ll take a little warm ale_!”

And, amid a roar of laughter from the spectators, we quit the Court of
Queen’s Bench.

Nor must we linger, either, beneath William Rufus’s carved roof-tree,
so ingeniously heightened, and otherwise transmogrified, by Sir Charles
Barry and his satellites. This is a different Westminster Hall to that
which I knew in my childhood, just after the great fire of ’34. There
was no great stained glass window at the end then, no brazen Gothic
candelabra, no golden House of Lords in the corridor beyond, where the
eye is dazzled with the gilding, the frescoes, the scarlet benches and
rich carpets, and where the Lord High Chancellor sits on the woolsack,
like an allegory of Themis in the midst of a blaze of fireworks. In my
time, the keeper of her Majesty’s conscience and the Great Seal sat in
a panelled room, like a dissenting chapel. Let us hasten forth from the
Great Hall, for it is full of memories. I spoke of famous footsteps on
the Mall, St. James’s; how many thousand footsteps—thousands?—millions
rather, have been lost here in fruitless pacing up and down! Westminster
Hall is always cool: well it may be so; the dust was laid and the air
refrigerated centuries since by the tears and the sighs of ruined
suitors. What a wondrous place the old hall is! what reminiscences it
conjures up—they will _not_ be laid in the Red Sea—of the gorgeous
banquets of the Plantagenets, of the trials of Laud and Strafford,
and of Laud and Strafford’s master; of Mr. Jonathan Wild’s ancestor
walking the hall with a straw in his shoe; of poor little Lady Jane
Grey and Guildford Dudley, her husband, standing their trial here on a
velvet-covered platform in the midst of the hall, for treason to Bloody
Mary. Did they ever cut a state prisoner’s head off in Westminster Hall,
I wonder, as they did Mary Stuart’s in the hall at Fotheringay? The place
is large enough.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TEN O’CLOCK A.M.: INTERIOR OF THE QUEEN’S BENCH PRISON.]

Once again I stand within the precincts of the Queen’s Bench; but where
is my Lord Owlett, where the bewigged barristers and the jury-box with
the “twelve honest men” within wiping their semperperspiring foreheads?
I am standing in the centre of a vast gravelled area, bounded on
the south side by a brick wall of tremendous height, and crowned by
those curious arrangements of geometrical spikes known as _chevaux de
frise_. To the north there is a range of ordinary-looking houses, the
numbers of which are painted very conspicuously in white characters on
a black ellipse above the doors, about which, moreover, there is this
peculiarity, that they are always open. If you peep through the yawning
portals, you will see that the staircases are of stone, and that the
roofs of the rooms on the ground-floor are vaulted. There are no barred
windows, no bolts, bars, or grim chains apparent, though from the back
windows of these houses there is a pleasant prospect of another high
wall, equally surmounted with _chevaux de frise_. When the spider
has got the fly comfortably into his web, and has satisfied himself
that he can’t get out, I daresay that he does not take the trouble to
handcuff him. In the midst of this gravelled area stands a pump, known
as the “Dolphin;” to the right of this institution, and somewhat in the
back-ground, is a great square building, called the “State House.” The
rooms here are double the size to those in the houses I have alluded
to, and are accorded by the governor of the place as a matter of favour
to those inmates of the—well, the college—who can afford to fill them
with a sufficient quantity of furniture. Close to the State House is a
strong iron gateway, through which the guardians of the college have a
strong disinclination to allow the under-graduates to pass, unless they
be furnished with a certain mysterious document called “a discharge.”
The guardians themselves are ruddy men with very big keys; but they
seem on the very best terms with the gentlemen whose intended exercise
outside the walls they feel compelled (doubtless through solicitude
for their precious health) to debar, and are continually bidding them
“good morning” in the most affable manner; it being also one of their
idiosyncrasies to rub their noses with the handles of the big keys while
going through the salutation. In days not very remote there were certain
succursals, or chapels of ease, to the college, in the shape of dingy
tenements in the borough of Southwark, extending as far as the Elephant
and Castle; and in these tenements, which were called the “Rules,” such
collegians as were in a position to offer a fantastic guarantee entitled
a “Bail Bond,” were permitted to dwell, and thence they wrote letters
to their friends and relations, stating that the iron was entering into
their souls, and that they were languishing—well, never mind where—in
college. These “rules” were abolished in the early years of her present
Majesty’s reign; and at the same time a stern Secretary of State
prohibited the renewal of a notable saturnalia called “a Mock Election,”
of which no less celebrated an artist than Haydon painted a picture (he
was himself a collegian at the time), which was bought, for considerably
more than it was worth, by King George IV. The saturnalia was fast
falling into desuetude by itself; but the Home Secretary also interfered
to put a stop to the somewhat boisterous conviviality which had reigned
among those collegians who had money, from time immemorial, and which
had converted the Queen’s Bench into a den of the most outrageous and
disgraceful dissipation and revelry. Under the present not very stringent
regulations (considering what a _carcere duro_ is, the other _alma
mater_ of Whitecross Street, to say nothing of the hideous place called
Horsemonger Lane), the collegians are restricted to the consumption of
one quart of beer—which they may have just as strong as ever they like—or
one imperial pint of wine, per diem, at their option; yet it is a very
curious fact, that no collegian who was flush of cash was ever found
to labour under any difficulty in providing sufficient refreshment for
his friends when he gave a wine party in his room. The payment of rent
is unknown in the college; and it is but rarely that the time-honoured
system of “chummage,” or quartering two or mere collegians in one room,
and allowing the richest to pay his companions a stipulated sum to go out
and find quarters elsewhere, is resorted to. As a rule, the collegian on
his arrival, after spending one night in a vaulted apartment close to
the entrance, and which bears a strong resemblance to the Gothic vault
described in “Rookwood”—an apartment known as the “receiving ward”—has
allotted to him, by solemnly-written ticket, a whitewashed chamber of
tolerable size, moderately haunted by mice, and “passably” infested by
fleas. Straightway there starts up, as it were from the bowels of the
earth, a corpulent female rubicund in countenance, tumbled in garments,
and profuse in compliments, assuring him that he is the very “Himage
of the Markis of Scatterbrass, which his aunt let him out by composing
with his creditors,” or “Capting Spurbox, of the Hoss Guards, as ’ad
champagne hevery mornin’, and went through the court payin’ nothink.”
She, for a small weekly stipend—say, five shillings—agrees to furnish
your room; and in an astonishingly short space of time you find the
bare cube transformed into a sufficiently comfortable bed-room and
sitting-room. For eighteenpence a week extra you may have a double green
baize door with brass nails, like a verdant coffin, and white dimity
curtains to your windows, with real tassels. In the train of the stout
tumbled female, there always follows a gaunt woman of no particular age,
with ropy hair, a battered bonnet, and scanty garments apparently nailed
to her angular form, who expresses, with many curtsies, her desire to
“do for you.” Don’t be alarmed; she simply means that for three or four
shillings a week she will clean your room, boil your kettle, and bring up
the dinner, which has been cooked for you in the common kitchen of the
college. She, too, has an acolyte, a weazened old man in a smock frock
and knee shorts (though I think that he must be dead or have left college
by this time[3]) who for a shilling a week will make your boots shine
like mirrors; who resides here, and has resided here for many years,
because he can’t or won’t pay thirty pounds, and who is reported to be
worth a mint of money. So here the collegian lives, and makes as merry as
he can under adverse circumstances. The same tender precautions adopted
by the authorities of the college to prevent the unnecessary egress
of those in _statu pupillari_, are enforced to preserve a due state
of morality among them. There is a chapel, as there is an infirmary,
within the walls; the lady collegians, of whom there is always a small
number in hold, are kept in jealous seclusion. Dicing and card-playing
are strictly prohibited, and contumacious contravention of the rules
involves the probability of the recalcitrant student being immured in a
_locus penitentiæ_ called the “Strong Room.” There he is kept for four
and twenty hours, _without tobacco_. Horrible punishment! This is in the
college attached to her Majesty’s Bench. Pshaw! Why should I beat about
the Bench, or the bush, any longer, or even endorse the quibble adopted
by those collegians who wish to have their letters addressed to them
genteelly, of “No. 1, Belvidere Place?” That which I have been describing
is a debtors’ jail—the Queen’s Prison, in fact.

And what of the collegians—the prisoners—themselves? It is ten o’clock
in the morning, and they are sauntering about in every variety of shabby
deshabille, smoking pipes after their meagre breakfasts, walking arm
in arm with one another, or with friends who have come to see them,
and whose ingress is permitted from nine a.m. until seven p.m. None
are allowed to enter after that hour; but those visitors already in
are allowed to stop till nine in the evening. Some of the collegian
prisoners, poor fellows, have women and little children with them, who
are very silly and sentimental, in their illogical way; but you may
depend on it that, in nine out of ten of these groups, the staple theme
of conversation is the probability of the captive being “out next week.”
They are always going to be out next week, these caged birds; but they
die sometimes in the Bench, for all that.

Don’t you think, too, that it would be as graceful as expedient to draw
a veil over these broken-down men? Even the felons in Pentonville are
allowed to wear masks in the exercise-yard. Why should I, whose sternest,
strongest aim it is to draw from Life, and from the life only, but who
wish to pluck the mote from no man’s eye, to cast a stone at no glass
house built on the pattern of mine own, expatiate in word-pictures upon
the dilapidated dandies, the whilom dashing bucks in dressing-gowns out
at elbows, and Turkish caps with tassels, set, with a woe-begone attempt
at jaunty bearing, on one side, the decayed tradesmen, the uncertificated
bankrupts, the cankers of a calm world and a long peace, that prowl and
shuffle through the yards of a debtors’ prison? Why, every man of the
world has acquaintances, if not friends, there. Why, poor old Jack, who
gave the champagne dinners we were so glad to be invited to, has been in
the Bench for months. Yonder broken-winged butterfly, relapsing, quite
against the order of nature, into a state of grubhood again, may have
gone through his Humanities with the best of us, and may say _Hodie mihi,
cras tibi_. To-day he is in jail; but to-morrow I, you, my brother the
millionaire, may be taken in execution; and who shall say that we shall
have the two pounds twelve wherewith to purchase the _habeas corpus_?




ELEVEN O’CLOCK A.M.—TROOPING THE GUARD, AND A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE.


I have the fortune, or misfortune, to live in a “quiet street,” and am
myself an essentially quiet man, loving to keep myself in the Queen’s
peace, and minding my own business, though devoutly wishing that people
would not mind it for me in quite so irritating a degree. I sleep soundly
when in health, and never question Mrs. Lillicrap’s mystifying items in
her weekly bill, of “mustard, vinegar, and mending,” or “pepper, postage
stamps, and mother-o’-pearl buttons.” I never grumble at the crying of
babies, remembering that a wise and good doctor once told me that those
dear innocents pass the days of their nonage in a chronic state of
stomach-ache and congestion of the brain, and console myself with that
thought. I can even support, without much murmuring, the jangling of
the pupils’ piano at Miss Besom’s establishment for young ladies, next
door. Distance, and a party-wall, lend enchantment to the sound, and I
set no more store by it than I do by the chirruping of the birds in the
town-bred foliage at the extremity of Buckingham Street, or the puffing
and snorting of the halfpenny steamboats at the “Fox-under-the-Hill.” I
am so quiet, that I can allow the family of a distant blood-relation to
reside in the parlours for twelve months, without troubling myself about
their health; and I never yet rebelled at the perverse orthography of the
washerwoman, who persists in spelling my half-hose thus: “Won pare sox.”
When I die, I hope that they will lay me in a very quiet church-yard in
Kent, that I know, where some one who cared for me has been mouldering
away peacefully these four years, where the clergyman’s blind white
pony will browse upon the salad that I am eating by the roots; where
the children will come and have famous games—their silver voices and
pattering feet upon the velvet turf make out a pleasant noise, I wot;
and where they will write “_Requiescat in pace_” upon my gravestone; if,
indeed, I leave maravedis enough behind me for Mr. Farley to cut me an
inscription withal.

Yet, quiet as I am, I become at Eleven o’Clock in the Morning on every
day of the week save Sunday a raving, ranting maniac—a dangerous lunatic,
panting with insane desires to do, not only myself but other people, a
mischief, and possessed, less by hallucination than by rabies. For so
sure as the clock of St. Martin’s strikes eleven, so sure does my quiet
street become a pandemonium of discordant sounds. My teeth are on edge
to think of them. The “musicianers,” whose advent from Clerkenwell and
the East-end of London I darkly hinted in a preceding chapter, begin
to penetrate through the vaster thoroughfares, and make their hated
appearance at the head of my street. First Italian organ-grinder,
hirsute, sunburnt, and saucy, who grinds airs from the “Trovatore” six
times over, follows with a selection from the “Traviata,” repeated
half a dozen times, finishes up with the “Old Hundredth” and the
“Postman’s Knock,” and then begins again. Next, shivering Hindoo, his
skin apparently just washed in walnut juice, with a voluminous turban,
dirty white muslin caftan, worsted stockings and hob-nailed shoes,
who, followed by two diminutive brown imps in similar costume, sings
a dismal ditty in the Hindostanee language, and beats the tom-tom
with fiendish monotony. Next comes a brazen woman in a Scotch cap, to
which is fastened a bunch of rusty black feathers, apparently culled
from a mourning coach past service. She wears a faded tartan kilt,
fleshings, short calico trews, a velveteen jacket, tin buckles in her
shoes, and two patches of red brick-dust on her haggard cheeks, and
is supposed to represent a Scottish highlander. She dances an absurd
fling, interpolated occasionally with a shrill howl to the music of
some etiolated bagpipes screeded by a shabby rogue of the male sex, her
companion, arrayed in similar habiliments. Next come the acrobats—drum,
clarionet, and all. You know what those nuisances are like, without
any extended description on my part. Close on their heels follows the
eloquent beggar, with his numerous destitute but scrupulously clean
family, who has, of course, that morning parted with his last shirt.
Then a lamentable woman with a baby begins to whimper “Old Dog Tray.”
Then swoop into the street an abominable band of ruffians, six in
number. They are swarthy villains, dressed in the semblance of Italian
goatherds, and are called, I believe, _pifferari_. They play upon a kind
of bagpipes—a hideous pig-skin-and-walking-stick-looking affair, and
accompany their droning by a succession of short yelps and a spasmodic
pedal movement that would be a near approach to a sailor’s hornpipe, if
it did bear a much closer resemblance to the war-dance of a wild Indian.
Add to these the Jews crying “Clo’!” the man who sells hearthstones,
and the woman who buys rabbit-skins, the butcher, the baker, and the
boys screaming shrill Nigger melodies, and rattling pieces of slate
between their fingers in imitation of the “bones,” and you will be able
to form an idea of the quietude of our street. From the infliction of
the soot-and-grease-bedaubed and tambourine-and-banjo-equipped Ethiopian
serenaders, we are indeed mercifully spared; but enough remains to turn a
respectable thoroughfare into a saturnalia.

I can do nothing with these people. I shout, I threaten, I shake my fist,
I objurgate them from my window in indifferent Italian, but to no avail.
They defy, scorn, disregard, make light of me. They are encouraged in
their abominable devices, not merely by the idlers in the street, the
servant-maids gossiping at the doors, the boys with the baskets, and
the nurse children, but by the people at the windows, who seem to have
nothing to do but to look from their casements all day long. There is
an ancient party of the female persuasion opposite my humble dwelling,
who was wont to take intense interest in the composition of my literary
essays. She used to bring her work to the window at first; but she never
did a stitch, and soon allowed that flimsy pretext to fall through,
and devoted herself with unaffected enjoyment to staring at me. As I
am modest and nervous, I felt compelled to put a stop to this somewhat
too persevering scrutiny; but I disdained to adopt the pusillanimous
and self-nose-amputating plan of pulling down the window blinds. I
tried taking her portrait as she sat, like an elderly Jessica, at the
casement, and drew horrifying caricatures of her in red chalk, holding
them up, from time to 